Reviewer papers:
1. Title: Expanding Taxonomies with Implicit Edge Semantics
Abstract: Curated taxonomies enhance the performance of machine-learning systems via high-quality structured knowledge. However, manually curating a large and rapidly-evolving taxonomy is infeasible. In this work, we propose Arborist, an approach to automatically expand textual taxonomies by predicting the parents of new taxonomy nodes. Unlike previous work, Arborist handles the more challenging scenario of taxonomies with heterogeneous edge semantics that are unobserved. Arborist learns latent representations of the edge semantics along with embeddings of the taxonomy nodes to measure taxonomic relatedness between node pairs. Arborist is then trained by optimizing a large-margin ranking loss with a dynamic margin function. We propose a principled formulation of the margin function, which theoretically guarantees that Arborist minimizes an upper-bound on the shortest-path distance between the predicted parents and actual parents in the taxonomy. Via extensive evaluation on a curated taxonomy at Pinterest and several public datasets, we demonstrate that Arborist outperforms the state-of-the-art, achieving up to 59% in mean reciprocal rank and 83% in recall at 15. We also explore the ability of Arborist to infer nodes’ taxonomic-roles, without explicit supervision on this task.
2. Title: Influence via Ethos: On the Persuasive Power of Reputation in Deliberation Online
Abstract: Deliberation among individuals online plays a key role in shaping the opinions that drive votes, purchases, donations and other critical offline behavior. Yet, the determinants of opinion-change via persuasion in deliberation online remain largely unexplored. Our research examines the persuasive power of $\textit{ethos}$ -- an individual's "reputation" -- using a 7-year panel of over a million debates from an argumentation platform containing explicit indicators of successful persuasion. We identify the causal effect of reputation on persuasion by constructing an instrument for reputation from a measure of past debate competition, and by controlling for unstructured argument text using neural models of language in the double machine-learning framework. We find that an individual's reputation significantly impacts their persuasion rate above and beyond the validity, strength and presentation of their arguments. In our setting, we find that having 10 additional reputation points causes a 31% increase in the probability of successful persuasion over the platform average. We also find that the impact of reputation is moderated by characteristics of the argument content, in a manner consistent with a theoretical model that attributes the persuasive power of reputation to heuristic information-processing under cognitive overload. We discuss managerial implications for platforms that facilitate deliberative decision-making for public and private organizations online.
3. Title: Uncovering Latent Biases in Text: Method and Application to Peer Review
Abstract: Quantifying systematic disparities in numerical quantities such as employment rates and wages between population subgroups provides compelling evidence for the existence of societal biases. However, biases in the text written for members of different subgroups (such as in recommendation letters for male and non-male candidates), though widely reported anecdotally, remain challenging to quantify. In this work, we introduce a novel framework to quantify bias in text caused by the visibility of subgroup membership indicators. We develop a nonparametric estimation and inference procedure to estimate this bias. We then formalize an identification strategy to causally link the estimated bias to the visibility of subgroup membership indicators, provided observations from time periods both before and after an identity-hiding policy change. We identify an application wherein "ground truth" bias can be inferred to evaluate our framework, instead of relying on synthetic or secondary data. Specifically, we apply our framework to quantify biases in the text of peer reviews from a reputed machine learning conference before and after the conference adopted a double-blind reviewing policy. We show evidence of biases in the review ratings that serves as "ground truth", and show that our proposed framework accurately detects these biases from the review text without having access to the review ratings.
4. Title: Detecting Attackable Sentences in Arguments
Abstract: Finding attackable sentences in an argument is the first step toward successful refutation in argumentation. We present a first large-scale analysis of sentence attackability in online arguments. We analyze driving reasons for attacks in argumentation and identify relevant characteristics of sentences. We demonstrate that a sentence's attackability is associated with many of these characteristics regarding the sentence's content, proposition types, and tone, and that an external knowledge source can provide useful information about attackability. Building on these findings, we demonstrate that machine learning models can automatically detect attackable sentences in arguments, significantly better than several baselines and comparably well to laypeople.
5. Title: xStream : Outlier Dete ‘ x ’ ion in Feature-Evolving Data Stream s
Abstract: This work addresses the outlier detection problem for featureevolving streams, which has not been studied before. In this setting both (1) data points may evolve, with feature values changing, as well as (2) feature space may evolve, with newly-emerging features over time. This is notably different from row-streams, where points with fixed features arrive one at a time. We propose a density-based ensemble outlier detector, called xStream, for this more extreme streaming setting which has the following key properties: (1) it is a constant-space and constant-time (per incoming update) algorithm, (2) it measures outlierness at multiple scales or granularities, it can handle (3i) high-dimensionality through distance-preserving projections, and (3ii) non-stationarity via O (1)-time model updates as the stream progresses. In addition, xStream can address the outlier detection problem for the (less general) disk-resident static as well as row-streaming settings. We evaluate xStream rigorously on numerous real-life datasets in all three settings: static, row-stream, and feature-evolving stream. Experiments under static and row-streaming scenarios show that xStream is as competitive as state-of-the-art detectors and particularly effective in high-dimensions with noise. We also demonstrate that our solution is fast and accurate with modest space overhead for evolving streams, on which there exists no competition. ACM Reference Format: Emaad Manzoor, Hemank Lamba, and Leman Akoglu. 2018. xStream: Outlier Dete‘x’ion in Feature-Evolving Data Streams . In KDD ’18: The 24th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining, August 19–23, 2018, London, United Kingdom. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 10 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3219819.3220107
6. Title: xStream: Outlier Detection in Feature-Evolving Data Streams
Abstract: This work addresses the outlier detection problem for feature-evolving streams, which has not been studied before. In this setting both (1) data points may evolve, with feature values changing, as well as (2) feature space may evolve, with newly-emerging features over time. This is notably different from row-streams, where points with fixed features arrive one at a time. We propose a density-based ensemble outlier detector, called xStream, for this more extreme streaming setting which has the following key properties: (1) it is a constant-space and constant-time (per incoming update) algorithm, (2) it measures outlierness at multiple scales or granularities, it can handle (3 i ) high-dimensionality through distance-preserving projections, and (3$ii$) non-stationarity via $O(1)$-time model updates as the stream progresses. In addition, xStream can address the outlier detection problem for the (less general) disk-resident static as well as row-streaming settings. We evaluate xStream rigorously on numerous real-life datasets in all three settings: static, row-stream, and feature-evolving stream. Experiments under static and row-streaming scenarios show that xStream is as competitive as state-of-the-art detectors and particularly effective in high-dimensions with noise. We also demonstrate that our solution is fast and accurate with modest space overhead for evolving streams, on which there exists no competition.
7. Title: Focused Concept Miner (FCM): Interpretable Deep Learning for Text Exploration
Abstract: We introduce the Focused Concept Miner (FCM), an interpretable deep learning text mining algorithm to (1) automatically extract coherent corpus-level concepts from text data, (2) focus the discovery of concepts so that they are highly correlated to the user-specified outcome, and (3) quantify the concept correlational importance to outcome. FCM is used to explore and potentially extract apriori unknown concepts from text that may explain business outcome. FCM is a custom neural network model explicitly configured to increase corpus-level insights and recovered-concept diversity without the need to provide any training data. 
 
We evaluate FCM using a dataset of online purchases containing the reviews read by each consumer. Compared to 4 interpretable baselines, FCM attains higher interpretability as quantified by 2 human-judged metrics and 1 automated metric, and higher recall of unique concepts as supported by several experiments. In addition, FCM extracted constructs relating to product quality theorized to impact conversion in literature, without being explicitly trained to do so. FCM also achieves superior predictive performance compared to 4 interpretable benchmarks while maintaining superior or competitive predictive performance compared to 8 blackbox classifiers. In further experiments, we evaluate FCM on text data from online newsgroups and a crowdfunding platform, investigate the impact of focusing on concept discovery, and study the interpretability-accuracy trade-off. We present FCM as a complimentary technique to explore and understand text data before applying standard causal inference techniques. We conclude by discussing managerial implications, potential business applications, limitations, and ideas for future development.
8. Title: RUSH!: Targeted Time-limited Coupons via Purchase Forecasts
Abstract: Time-limited promotions that exploit consumers' sense of urgency to boost sales account for billions of dollars in consumer spending each year. However, it is challenging to discover the right timing and duration of a promotion to increase its chances of being redeemed. In this work, we consider the problem of delivering time-limited discount coupons, where we partner with a large national bank functioning as a commission-based third-party coupon provider. Specifically, we use large-scale anonymized transaction records to model consumer spending and forecast future purchases, based on which we generate data-driven, personalized coupons. Our proposed model RUSH! (1) predicts {both the time and category} of the next event; (2) captures correlations between purchases in different categories (such as shopping triggering dining purchases); (3) incorporates temporal dynamics of purchase behavior (such as increased spending on weekends); (4) is composed of additive factors that are easily interpretable; and finally (5) scales linearly to millions of transactions. We design a cost-benefit framework that facilitates systematic evaluation in terms of our application, and show that RUSH! provides higher expected value than various baselines that do not jointly model time and category information.
9. Title: Fast Memory-efficient Anomaly Detection in Streaming Heterogeneous Graphs
Abstract: Given a stream of heterogeneous graphs containing different types of nodes and edges, how can we spot anomalous ones in real-time while consuming bounded memory? This problem is motivated by and generalizes from its application in security to host-level advanced persistent threat (APT) detection. We propose StreamSpot, a clustering based anomaly detection approach that addresses challenges in two key fronts: (1) heterogeneity, and (2) streaming nature. We introduce a new similarity function for heterogeneous graphs that compares two graphs based on their relative frequency of local substructures, represented as short strings. This function lends itself to a vector representation of a graph, which is (a) fast to compute, and (b) amenable to a sketched version with bounded size that preserves similarity. StreamSpot exhibits desirable properties that a streaming application requires: it is (i) fully-streaming; processing the stream one edge at a time as it arrives, (ii) memory-efficient; requiring constant space for the sketches and the clustering, (iii) fast; taking constant time to update the graph sketches and the cluster summaries that can process over 100,000 edges per second, and (iv) online; scoring and flagging anomalies in real time. Experiments on datasets containing simulated system-call flow graphs from normal browser activity and various attack scenarios (ground truth) show that StreamSpot is high-performance; achieving above 95% detection accuracy with small delay, as well as competitive time and memory usage.
10. Title: Scheduling Broadcasts in a Network of Timelines
Abstract: Broadcasts and timelines are the primary mechanism of information exchange in online social platforms today. Services like Facebook, Twitter and Instagram have enabled ordinary people to reach large audiences spanning cultures and countries, while their massive popularity has created increasingly competitive marketplaces of attention. Timing broadcasts to capture the attention of such geographically diverse audiences has sparked interest from many startups and social marketing gurus. However, formal study is lacking on both the timing and frequency problems. We study for the first time the broadcast scheduling problem of specifying the timing and frequency of publishing content to maximise the attention received. 
We validate and quantify three interacting behavioural phenomena to parametrise social platform users: information overload, bursty circadian rhythms and monotony aversion, which is defined here for the first time. We formalise a timeline information exchange process based on these phenomena, and formulate an objective function that quantifies the expected collective attention. We finally present experiments on real data from Twitter, where we discover a counter-intuitive scheduling strategy that outperforms popular heuristics while producing fewer posts.
