Reviewer papers:
1. Title: Use of SWIR dehydration and OCT to assess the complete arrest of simulated incipient caries lesions.
Abstract: Previous studies have shown that optical coherence tomography (OCT) can be used to show the formation of a transparent surface zone on caries lesions indicative of remineralization. Studies have also shown that monitoring changes in the diffuse reflectivity of caries lesions during drying with air can be used to assess lesion activity and that the largest changes occur at SWIR wavelengths coincident with high water absorption at 1450 and 1950 nm. The purpose of this study was to determine when remineralization has occurred by monitoring changes in SWIR reflectance measurements and OCT images of simulated lesions over an extended time period during exposure to a remineralization solution. Eight bovine enamel surfaces each with two treatment windows were exposed to a pH cycling regimen to produce simulated lesions 50-100 μm deep. OCT at 1310 nm was used to image the samples at each time point. An extended range tungsten halogen lamp with a 1450 nm band pass filter and a broadband amplified spontaneous emission source centered near the peak of the water-absorption band at 1950 nm were used as light sources. An extended range InGaAs camera (1000-2340 nm) was used to acquire reflected light images as the samples were dried with air. After 32 days of exposure to the remineralization solution there were no further changes to the samples suggesting they had been completely arrested.
2. Title: Evaluating interproximal and occlusal lesion severity with a dual SWIR transillumination/reflectance probe.
Abstract: We have developed a clinical probe capable of acquiring simultaneous, multispectral short wavelength infrared (SWIR) reflectance and occlusal transillumination images of lesions on tooth proximal and occlusal surfaces to reduce the potential of false positives and enhance diagnosis. The dual probe was 3D printed and the imaging system uses an InGaAs camera and broadband light sources at 1310 nm for occlusal transillumination and 1600 nm for cross-polarization reflectance measurements. In this study a mathematical model to estimate the penetration depth of "hidden" occlusal lesions from the SWIR images was developed. We compared the model's estimated lesion depth on 18 extracted teeth with lesions against microCT measurements. Although the model estimated depth deviates from that measured in microCT at higher depths, there is a good linear correlation (R2 = 0.93) between the estimated depth from SWIR images and the measured depth using microCT. SWIR occlusal transillumination images at 1300 nm also provide information about interproximal lesion penetration depth which can be directly viewed from the occlusal surface. SWIR occlusal transillumination and reflectance depth measurements on 49 natural interproximal lesions were compared with microCT measurements. There was significant correlation between the depths measured with SWIR occlusal transillumination (R2 = 0.81) and reflectance (R2 = 0.19) compared with the depths measured with microCT.
3. Title: Natural Language to Code Translation with Execution
Abstract: Generative models of code, pretrained on large corpora of programs, have shown great success in translating natural language to code (Chen et al., 2021; Austin et al., 2021; Li et al., 2022, inter alia). While these models do not explicitly incorporate program semantics (i.e., execution results) during training, they are able to generate correct solutions for many problems. However, choosing a single correct program from among a generated set for each problem remains challenging. In this work, we introduce execution result– based minimum Bayes risk decoding (MBREXEC) for program selection and show that it improves the few-shot performance of pretrained code models on natural-language-tocode tasks. We select output programs from a generated candidate set by marginalizing over program implementations that share the same semantics. Because exact equivalence is intractable, we execute each program on a small number of test inputs to approximate semantic equivalence. Across datasets, execution or simulated execution significantly outperforms the methods that do not involve program semantics. We find that MBR-EXEC consistently improves over all execution-unaware selection methods, suggesting it as an effective approach for natural language to code translation.
4. Title: Assessing lesion activity of secondary lesions on extracted teeth by thermal dehydration measurement and optical coherence tomography.
Abstract: Secondary caries occurs when leakage in the interfaces between restorative materials and tooth structure allow fluid and bacterial acid infiltration. Thermal imaging coupled with dehydration can be used to measure this increase in fluid permeability for secondary lesions in teeth. Thermal imaging exploits the temperature change due to water evaporation during dehydration to measure the rate of water diffusion from porous lesion areas. Previous in vitro and in vivo thermal imaging studies on enamel and root surfaces have been promising for assessing natural lesion activity. In this study, the rates of dehydration for secondary lesions on extracted teeth were measured. The secondary lesions were also assessed by optical coherence tomography (OCT) and correlated with dehydration rates to determine lesion activity. Future studies with μCT will be used to further confirm lesion severity and structure.
5. Title: Inferring Rewards from Language in Context
Abstract: In classic instruction following, language like “I’d like the JetBlue ﬂight” maps to actions (e.g., selecting that ﬂight). However, language also conveys information about a user’s underlying reward function (e.g., a general preference for JetBlue), which can allow a model to carry out desirable actions in new contexts. We present a model that infers rewards from language pragmatically: reasoning about how speakers choose utterances not only to elicit desired actions, but also to reveal information about their preferences. On a new interactive ﬂight–booking task with natural language, our model more accurately infers rewards and predicts optimal actions in unseen environments, in comparison to past work that ﬁrst maps language to actions (instruction following) and then maps actions to rewards (inverse reinforcement learning).
6. Title: Measurement of the Depth of Lesions on Proximal Surfaces with SWIR Multispectral Transillumination and Reflectance Imaging
Abstract: The aim of this study was to compare the diagnostic performance of dual short-wavelength infrared (SWIR) transillumination and reflectance multispectral imaging devices for imaging interproximal lesions with radiography using extracted teeth that had been imaged with micro-computed tomography (microCT). Thirty-six extracted teeth with 67 lesions on the proximal surfaces were imaged using a newly fabricated SWIR multispectral proximal transillumination and reflectance imaging device along with an existing SWIR multispectral occlusal transillumination and reflectance device. The ability of SWIR imaging and radiography to detect lesions and accurately assess lesion dimensions were compared using microCT as a standard. Occlusal and proximal transillumination and occlusal reflectance performed best for imaging interproximal lesions while proximal reflectance was not useful for imaging interproximal lesions from tooth buccal and lingual surfaces. There was high correlation of the lesion dimensions measured in occlusal and proximal transillumination images compared to microCT and moderate correlation in occlusal reflectance images. The correlation between the lesion depth measured in radiographs and the lesion depth measured with microCT was not significant. This study demonstrates that SWIR occlusal and proximal transillumination and SWIR occlusal reflectance images are useful for imaging interproximal lesions and they provide more accurate measurements of lesion severity.
7. Title: InCoder: A Generative Model for Code Infilling and Synthesis
Abstract: Code is seldom written in a single left-to-right pass and is instead repeatedly edited and refined. We introduce INCODER, a unified generative model that can perform program synthesis (via left-to-right generation) as well as editing (via infilling). InCoder is trained to generate code files from a large corpus of permissively licensed code, where regions of code have been randomly masked and moved to the end of each file, allowing code infilling with bidirectional context. Our model is the first large generative code model that is able to infill arbitrary regions of code, which we evaluate in a zero-shot setting on challenging tasks such as type inference, comment generation, and variable re-naming. We find that the ability to condition on bidirectional context substantially improves performance on these tasks, while still performing comparably on standard program synthesis benchmarks in comparison to left-to-right only models pretrained at similar scale. The INCODER models and code are publicly released.
8. Title: Dehydration imaging of dental fluorosis at 1950 nm.
Abstract: Dental fluorosis is an increasing problem in the U.S. due to excessive exposure to fluoride from the environment. Fluorosis causes hypomineralization of the enamel during tooth development and mild fluorosis is visible as faint white lines on the tooth surface while the most severe fluorosis can result in pitted surfaces. It is difficult to differentiate lesions due to fluorosis from those due to caries. Dental fluorosis appears with extremely high contrast at short wavelength infrared (SWIR) wavelengths of 1450 and 1960 nm coincident with higher water absorption. In this study reflectance measurements at 1450 and 1950 nm were used to monitor the dehydration dynamics of lesions due to fluorosis on extracted teeth. The dehydration dynamics were compared with the lesion structure that was measured with microCT. Sixteen extracted teeth with suspected fluorosis were imaged and microCT showed that the mean surface zone thickness was 118 ± 30 μm and the lesion depth was 284 ± 105 μm for the areas of fluorosis investigated. The dehydration dynamics of lesions due to fluorosis appeared most similar to those of arrested caries lesions. There was no significant correlation (P >0.05) of the intensity change and rate of the intensity change at 1450 or 1950 nm with either the lesion surface zone thickness or the lesion depth.
9. Title: Reference-Centric Models for Grounded Collaborative Dialogue
Abstract: We present a grounded neural dialogue model that successfully collaborates with people in a partially-observable reference game. We focus on a setting where two agents each observe an overlapping part of a world context and need to identify and agree on some object they share. Therefore, the agents should pool their information and communicate pragmatically to solve the task. Our dialogue agent accurately grounds referents from the partner’s utterances using a structured reference resolver, conditions on these referents using a recurrent memory, and uses a pragmatic generation procedure to ensure the partner can resolve the references the agent produces. We evaluate on the OneCommon spatial grounding dialogue task (Udagawa and Aizawa 2019), involving a number of dots arranged on a board with continuously varying positions, sizes, and shades. Our agent substantially outperforms the previous state of the art for the task, obtaining a 20% relative improvement in successful task completion in self-play evaluations and a 50% relative improvement in success in human evaluations.
10. Title: Modular Networks for Compositional Instruction Following
Abstract: Standard architectures used in instruction following often struggle on novel compositions of subgoals (e.g. navigating to landmarks or picking up objects) observed during training. We propose a modular architecture for following natural language instructions that describe sequences of diverse subgoals. In our approach, subgoal modules each carry out natural language instructions for a specific subgoal type. A sequence of modules to execute is chosen by learning to segment the instructions and predicting a subgoal type for each segment. When compared to standard, non-modular sequence-to-sequence approaches on ALFRED, a challenging instruction following benchmark, we find that modularization improves generalization to novel subgoal compositions, as well as to environments unseen in training.
11. Title: Interactive Assignments for Teaching Structured Neural NLP
Abstract: We present a set of assignments for a graduate-level NLP course. Assignments are designed to be interactive, easily gradable, and to give students hands-on experience with several key types of structure (sequences, tags, parse trees, and logical forms), modern neural architectures (LSTMs and Transformers), inference algorithms (dynamic programs and approximate search) and training methods (full and weak supervision). We designed assignments to build incrementally both within each assignment and across assignments, with the goal of enabling students to undertake graduate-level research in NLP by the end of the course.
12. Title: Are You Looking? Grounding to Multiple Modalities in Vision-and-Language Navigation
Abstract: Vision-and-Language Navigation (VLN) requires grounding instructions, such as “turn right and stop at the door”, to routes in a visual environment. The actual grounding can connect language to the environment through multiple modalities, e.g. “stop at the door” might ground into visual objects, while “turn right” might rely only on the geometric structure of a route. We investigate where the natural language empirically grounds under two recent state-of-the-art VLN models. Surprisingly, we discover that visual features may actually hurt these models: models which only use route structure, ablating visual features, outperform their visual counterparts in unseen new environments on the benchmark Room-to-Room dataset. To better use all the available modalities, we propose to decompose the grounding procedure into a set of expert models with access to different modalities (including object detections) and ensemble them at prediction time, improving the performance of state-of-the-art models on the VLN task.
13. Title: Pragmatically Informative Text Generation
Abstract: We improve the informativeness of models for conditional text generation using techniques from computational pragmatics. These techniques formulate language production as a game between speakers and listeners, in which a speaker should generate output text that a listener can use to correctly identify the original input that the text describes. While such approaches are widely used in cognitive science and grounded language learning, they have received less attention for more standard language generation tasks. We consider two pragmatic modeling methods for text generation: one where pragmatics is imposed by information preservation, and another where pragmatics is imposed by explicit modeling of distractors. We find that these methods improve the performance of strong existing systems for abstractive summarization and generation from structured meaning representations.
14. Title: Cross-Domain Generalization of Neural Constituency Parsers
Abstract: Neural parsers obtain state-of-the-art results on benchmark treebanks for constituency parsing—but to what degree do they generalize to other domains? We present three results about the generalization of neural parsers in a zero-shot setting: training on trees from one corpus and evaluating on out-of-domain corpora. First, neural and non-neural parsers generalize comparably to new domains. Second, incorporating pre-trained encoder representations into neural parsers substantially improves their performance across all domains, but does not give a larger relative improvement for out-of-domain treebanks. Finally, despite the rich input representations they learn, neural parsers still benefit from structured output prediction of output trees, yielding higher exact match accuracy and stronger generalization both to larger text spans and to out-of-domain corpora. We analyze generalization on English and Chinese corpora, and in the process obtain state-of-the-art parsing results for the Brown, Genia, and English Web treebanks.
15. Title: Policy Gradient as a Proxy for Dynamic Oracles in Constituency Parsing
Abstract: Dynamic oracles provide strong supervision for training constituency parsers with exploration, but must be custom defined for a given parser’s transition system. We explore using a policy gradient method as a parser-agnostic alternative. In addition to directly optimizing for a tree-level metric such as F1, policy gradient has the potential to reduce exposure bias by allowing exploration during training; moreover, it does not require a dynamic oracle for supervision. On four constituency parsers in three languages, the method substantially outperforms static oracle likelihood training in almost all settings. For parsers where a dynamic oracle is available (including a novel oracle which we define for the transition system of Dyer et al., 2016), policy gradient typically recaptures a substantial fraction of the performance gain afforded by the dynamic oracle.
16. Title: Speaker-Follower Models for Vision-and-Language Navigation
Abstract: Navigation guided by natural language instructions presents a challenging reasoning problem for instruction followers. Natural language instructions typically identify only a few high-level decisions and landmarks rather than complete low-level motor behaviors; much of the missing information must be inferred based on perceptual context. In machine learning settings, this is doubly challenging: it is difficult to collect enough annotated data to enable learning of this reasoning process from scratch, and also difficult to implement the reasoning process using generic sequence models. Here we describe an approach to vision-and-language navigation that addresses both these issues with an embedded speaker model. We use this speaker model to (1) synthesize new instructions for data augmentation and to (2) implement pragmatic reasoning, which evaluates how well candidate action sequences explain an instruction. Both steps are supported by a panoramic action space that reflects the granularity of human-generated instructions. Experiments show that all three components of this approach---speaker-driven data augmentation, pragmatic reasoning and panoramic action space---dramatically improve the performance of a baseline instruction follower, more than doubling the success rate over the best existing approach on a standard benchmark.
17. Title: Effective Inference for Generative Neural Parsing
Abstract: Generative neural models have recently achieved state-of-the-art results for constituency parsing. However, without a feasible search procedure, their use has so far been limited to reranking the output of external parsers in which decoding is more tractable. We describe an alternative to the conventional action-level beam search used for discriminative neural models that enables us to decode directly in these generative models. We then show that by improving our basic candidate selection strategy and using a coarse pruning function, we can improve accuracy while exploring significantly less of the search space. Applied to the model of Choe and Charniak (2016), our inference procedure obtains 92.56 F1 on section 23 of the Penn Treebank, surpassing prior state-of-the-art results for single-model systems.
18. Title: Unified Pragmatic Models for Generating and Following Instructions
Abstract: We show that explicit pragmatic inference aids in correctly generating and following natural language instructions for complex, sequential tasks. Our pragmatics-enabled models reason about why speakers produce certain instructions, and about how listeners will react upon hearing them. Like previous pragmatic models, we use learned base listener and speaker models to build a pragmatic speaker that uses the base listener to simulate the interpretation of candidate descriptions, and a pragmatic listener that reasons counterfactually about alternative descriptions. We extend these models to tasks with sequential structure. Evaluation of language generation and interpretation shows that pragmatic inference improves state-of-the-art listener models (at correctly interpreting human instructions) and speaker models (at producing instructions correctly interpreted by humans) in diverse settings.
19. Title: Improving Neural Parsing by Disentangling Model Combination and Reranking Effects
Abstract: Recent work has proposed several generative neural models for constituency parsing that achieve state-of-the-art results. Since direct search in these generative models is difficult, they have primarily been used to rescore candidate outputs from base parsers in which decoding is more straightforward. We first present an algorithm for direct search in these generative models. We then demonstrate that the rescoring results are at least partly due to implicit model combination rather than reranking effects. Finally, we show that explicit model combination can improve performance even further, resulting in new state-of-the-art numbers on the PTB of 94.25 F1 when training only on gold data and 94.66 F1 when using external data.
20. Title: Challenges for using social media for early detection of T2DM
Abstract: Twitter and other social media data are utilized for a wide variety of applications such as marketing and stock market prediction. Each application and appropriate domain of social media text presents its own challenges and benefits. We discuss methods for detecting obesity, a risk factor for Type II Diabetes Mellitus (T2DM), from the language of food on Twitter on community data, the peculiarities of this data, and the development of individual-level data for this task.
