Reviewer papers:
1. Title: CSFCube - A Test Collection of Computer Science Research Articles for Faceted Query by Example
Abstract: Query by Example is a well-known information retrieval task in which a document is chosen by the user as the search query and the goal is to retrieve relevant documents from a large collection. However, a document often covers multiple aspects of a topic. To address this scenario we introduce the task of faceted Query by Example in which users can also specify a finer grained aspect in addition to the input query document. We focus on the application of this task in scientific literature search. We envision models which are able to retrieve scientific papers analogous to a query scientific paper along specifically chosen rhetorical structure elements as one solution to this problem. In this work, the rhetorical structure elements, which we refer to as facets, indicate backgrounds, methods, or results of a scientific paper. We introduce and describe an expert annotated test collection to evaluate models trained to perform this task. Our test collection consists of a diverse set of 50 query documents, drawn from computational linguistics and machine learning venues. We carefully followed the annotation guideline used by TREC for depth-k pooling (k = 100 or 250) and the resulting data collection consists of graded relevance scores with high annotation agreement. The data is freely available for research purposes.
2. Title: MS-Mentions: Consistently Annotating Entity Mentions in Materials Science Procedural Text
Abstract: Material science synthesis procedures are a promising domain for scientific NLP, as proper modeling of these recipes could provide insight into new ways of creating materials. However, a fundamental challenge in building information extraction models for material science synthesis procedures is getting accurate labels for the materials, operations, and other entities of those procedures. We present a new corpus of entity mention annotations over 595 Material Science synthesis procedural texts (157,488 tokens), which greatly expands the training data available for the Named Entity Recognition task. We outline a new label inventory designed to provide consistent annotations and a new annotation approach intended to maximize the consistency and annotation speed of domain experts. Inter-annotator agreement studies and baseline models trained upon the data suggest that the corpus provides high-quality annotations of these mention types. This corpus helps lay a foundation for future high-quality modeling of synthesis procedures.
3. Title: Multi-Vector Models with Textual Guidance for Fine-Grained Scientific Document Similarity
Abstract: We present a new scientiﬁc document similarity model based on matching ﬁne-grained aspects of texts. To train our model, we exploit a naturally-occurring source of supervision: sentences in the full-text of papers that cite multiple papers together ( co-citations ). Such co-citations not only reﬂect close paper relatedness, but also provide textual descriptions of how the co-cited papers are related. This novel form of textual supervision is used for learning to match aspects across papers. We de-velop multi-vector representations where vec-tors correspond to sentence-level aspects of documents, and present two methods for aspect matching: (1) A fast method that only matches single aspects, and (2) a method that makes sparse multiple matches with an Optimal Transport mechanism that computes an Earth Mover’s Distance between aspects. Our approach improves performance on document similarity tasks in four datasets. Further, our fast single-match method achieves competitive results, paving the way for applying ﬁne-grained similarity to large scientiﬁc corpora. 1
4. Title: An Instance Level Approach for Shallow Semantic Parsing in Scientific Procedural Text
Abstract: In specific domains, such as procedural scientific text, human labeled data for shallow semantic parsing is especially limited and expensive to create. Fortunately, such specific domains often use rather formulaic writing, such that the different ways of expressing relations in a small number of grammatically similar labeled sentences may provide high coverage of semantic structures in the corpus, through an appropriately rich similarity metric. In light of this opportunity, this paper explores an instance-based approach to the relation prediction sub-task within shallow semantic parsing, in which semantic labels from structurally similar sentences in the training set are copied to test sentences. Candidate similar sentences are retrieved using SciBERT embeddings. For labels where it is possible to copy from a similar sentence we employ an instance level copy network, when this is not possible, a globally shared parametric model is employed. Experiments show our approach outperforms both baseline and prior methods by 0.75 to 3 F1 absolute in the Wet Lab Protocol Corpus and 1 F1 absolute in the Materials Science Procedural Text Corpus.
5. Title: Roll Call Vote Prediction with Knowledge Augmented Models
Abstract: The official voting records of United States congresspeople are preserved as roll call votes. Prediction of voting behavior of politicians for whom no voting record exists, such as individuals running for office, is important for forecasting key political decisions. Prior work has relied on past votes cast to predict future votes, and thus fails to predict voting patterns for politicians without voting records. We address this by augmenting a prior state of the art model with multiple sources of external knowledge so as to enable prediction on unseen politicians. The sources of knowledge we use are news text and Freebase, a manually curated knowledge base. We propose augmentations based on unigram features for news text, and a knowledge base embedding method followed by a neural network composition for relations from Freebase. Empirical evaluation of these approaches indicate that the proposed models outperform the prior system for politicians with complete historical voting records by 1.0% point of accuracy (8.7% error reduction) and for politicians without voting records by 33.4% points of accuracy (66.7% error reduction). We also show that the knowledge base augmented approach outperforms the news text augmented approach by 4.2% points of accuracy.
6. Title: The Materials Science Procedural Text Corpus: Annotating Materials Synthesis Procedures with Shallow Semantic Structures
Abstract: Materials science literature contains millions of materials synthesis procedures described in unstructured natural language text. Large-scale analysis of these synthesis procedures would facilitate deeper scientific understanding of materials synthesis and enable automated synthesis planning. Such analysis requires extracting structured representations of synthesis procedures from the raw text as a first step. To facilitate the training and evaluation of synthesis extraction models, we introduce a dataset of 230 synthesis procedures annotated by domain experts with labeled graphs that express the semantics of the synthesis sentences. The nodes in this graph are synthesis operations and their typed arguments, and labeled edges specify relations between the nodes. We describe this new resource in detail and highlight some specific challenges to annotating scientific text with shallow semantic structure. We make the corpus available to the community to promote further research and development of scientific information extraction systems.
7. Title: Inorganic Materials Synthesis Planning with Literature-Trained Neural Networks
Abstract: Leveraging new data sources is a key step in accelerating the pace of materials design and discovery. To complement the strides in synthesis planning driven by historical, experimental, and computed data, we present an automated, unsupervised method for connecting scientific literature to inorganic synthesis insights. Starting from natural language text, we apply word embeddings from language models, which are fed into a named entity recognition model, upon which a conditional variational autoencoder is trained to generate syntheses for any inorganic materials of interest. We show the potential of this technique by predicting precursors for two perovskite materials, using only training data published over a decade prior to their first reported syntheses. We demonstrate that the model learns representations of materials corresponding to synthesis-related properties, and that the model's behavior complements existing thermodynamic knowledge. Finally, we apply the model to perform synthesizability screening for proposed novel perovskite compounds.
8. Title: Automatically Extracting Action Graphs from Materials Science Synthesis Procedures
Abstract: Computational synthesis planning approaches have achieved recent success in organic chemistry, where tabulated synthesis procedures are readily available for supervised learning. The syntheses of inorganic materials, however, exist primarily as natural language narratives contained within scientific journal articles. This synthesis information must first be extracted from the text in order to enable analogous synthesis planning methods for inorganic materials. In this work, we present a system for automatically extracting structured representations of synthesis procedures from the texts of materials science journal articles that describe explicit, experimental syntheses of inorganic compounds. We define the structured representation as a set of linked events made up of extracted scientific entities and evaluate two unsupervised approaches for extracting these structures on expert-annotated articles: a strong heuristic baseline and a generative model of procedural text. We also evaluate a variety of supervised models for extracting scientific entities. Our results provide insight into the nature of the data and directions for further work in this exciting new area of research.
9. Title: Complex and degraded color document image binarization
Abstract: We present a document binarization scheme that is intended at consistently binarizing a range of degraded color document images. The proposed solution makes use of a mean-shift algorithm based segmentation applied at different scales of the image and a contrast enhanced version of the popular Niblack's thresholding method. The solution has been evaluated using standard metrics used in a prominent binarization competition and has also been subject to an end-to-end evaluation by use in an OCR system. The proposed solution was found to perform at par or better than existing state of the art binarization solutions and was found to always be more consistent in performance than the state of the art.
10. Title: Connected Operators for Non-text Object Segmentation in Grayscale Document Images
Abstract: This paper presents an unconventional method of segmenting nontext objects directly from a grayscale document image by making use of connected operators, combined with the Otsu thresholding method, where the connected operators are realized as a maxtree. The maxtree structure is used for a simplification of the image and at a later stage, it is used as a structure from which to extract the desired objects. The proposed solution is aimed at segmenting halftone images, tables, line drawings, and graphs. The solution has been evaluated and some of its shortcomings are highlighted. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first attempt at using connected operators for page segmentation.
