Reviewer papers:
1. Title: Elevation of Hemoglobin A1c Increases the Atherosclerotic Plaque Vulnerability and the Visit-to-Visit Variability of Lipid Profiles in Patients Who Underwent Elective Percutaneous Coronary Intervention
Abstract: Background Increased plaque vulnerability and higher lipid variability are causes of adverse cardiovascular events. Despite a close association between glucose and lipid metabolisms, the influence of elevated glycated hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c) on plaque vulnerability and lipid variability remains unclear. Methods Among subjects undergoing percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) from 2009 through 2019, 366 patients received intravascular optical coherence tomography (OCT) assessment and 4,445 patients underwent the scheduled follow-ups within 1 year after PCI. Vulnerability features of culprit vessels were analyzed by OCT examination, including the assessment of lipid, macrophage, calcium, and minimal fibrous cap thickness (FCT). Visit-to-visit lipid variability was determined by different definitions including standard deviation (SD), coefficient of variation (CV), and variability independent of the mean (VIM). Multivariable linear regression analysis was used to verify the influence of HbA1c on plaque vulnerability features and lipid variability. Exploratory analyses were also performed in non-diabetic patients. Results Among enrolled subjects, the pre-procedure HbA1c was 5.90 ± 1.31%, and the average follow-up HbA1c was 5.98 ± 1.16%. By OCT assessment, multivariable linear regression analyses demonstrated that patients with elevated HbA1c had a thinner minimal FCT (β = −6.985, P = 0.048), greater lipid index (LI) (β = 226.299, P = 0.005), and higher macrophage index (β = 54.526, P = 0.045). Even in non-diabetic patients, elevated HbA1c also linearly decreased minimal FCT (β = −14.011, P = 0.036), increased LI (β = 290.048, P = 0.041) and macrophage index (β = 120.029, P = 0.048). Subsequently, scheduled follow-ups were performed during 1-year following PCI. Multivariable linear regression analyses proved that elevated average follow-up HbA1c levels increased the VIM of lipid profiles, including low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (β = 2.594, P < 0.001), high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (β = 0.461, P = 0.044), non-high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (β = 1.473, P < 0.001), total cholesterol (β = 0.947, P < 0.001), and triglyceride (β = 4.217, P < 0.001). The result was consistent in non-diabetic patients and was verified when SD and CV were used to estimate variability. Conclusion In patients undergoing elective PCI, elevated HbA1c increases the atherosclerotic plaque vulnerability and the visit-to-visit variability of lipid profiles, which is consistent in non-diabetic patients.
2. Title: The Effect and Underlying Mechanism of Statins in the Prevention of Post-Contrast Acute Kidney Injury: A Multicenter Retrospective Observational Study
Abstract: 
 Background: Post-Contrast acute kidney injury (PC-AKI) is a severe complication of coronary angiography (CAG) and percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI). At present, the mechanism and effect of statins on PC-AKI and its mechanism are still unclear. Methods: It was a multicenter retrospective obeservational study. We reviewed 4386 patients who underwent CAG or PCI, with serum creatinine recorded pre- or post-procedure within 72hrs after PCI, from December, 2006 to December, 2019 admitted to Sir Run Run Shaw Hospital and its medical consortium hospitals. Multivariate logical regression was used to explore whether preoperative use of statins was a protective factor for PC-AKI, and then path analysis model was used to explore the specific mechanism of statins. Results: In total, 4386 patients were enrolled in the study, the mean age was 67 yrs old, 17.9% with PC-AKI, 83.3% with pre-operative statin therapy. The incidence of PC-AKI was significantly lower in statin therapy group than non-statins therapy group. Multivariate regression indicated that pre-operative statin therapy was significantly negatively associated with percentage of elevated creatinine (β: -0.118, p<0.001) and PC-AKI (OR: 0.575, p<0.001). In pre-operative statin therapy group, no statistically significant deference was detected between atorvastatin and rosuvastatin group (OR: 1.052, p=0.558). Pathway model analysis indicated the direct protective effectiveness of pre-operative statin therapy on PC-AKI (p<0.001), but neither with its lipid-lowering effect (p=0.277) nor anti-inflammatory effect (p=0.596). Furthermore, It was found that “LDL-C→CRP” mediated the relationship between pre-operative statin therapy and PC-AKI (p=0.007); however, only explained less than 1% of the pre-operative statin therapy’s protective effects on PC-AKI. Conclusion: Pre-operative statin therapy is an independent protective factor of PC-AKI, which is not affected by the type of statins and not achieved by lipid-lowering effect or anti-inflammatory effect. Keywords : post-contrast acute kidney injury, statins, path analysis, mediation analysis.
3. Title: Role of Disulfide Bonds and Sulfhydryl Blocked by N-Ethylmaleimide on the Properties of Different Protein-Stabilized Emulsions
Abstract: To investigate the role of sulfhydryl groups and disulfide bonds in different protein-stabilized emulsions, N-ethylmaleimide (NEM) was used as a sulfhydryl-blocking agent added in the emulsion. The addition of NEM to block the sulfhydryl groups resulted in a reduction in disulfide bond formation, which enabled the internal structure of the protein molecule to be destroyed, and then decreased the restriction of protein membrane on the oil droplets. Furthermore, with the NEM content increasing in the emulsion, a reduction in the protein emulsifying activity and emulsion stability also occurred. At the same time, the intermolecular interaction of the protein on the oil droplet interface membrane was destroyed, and the emulsion droplet size increased with the NEM content in the emulsion. Although NEM blocking sulfhydryl groups from forming disulfide bonds has similar effects on three types of protein emulsion, the degree of myofibrillar protein (MP), egg-white protein isolate (EPI), and soybean protein isolate (SPI) used as emulsifiers had a subtle difference.
4. Title: Association of the classification and severity of heart failure with the incidence of contrast-induced acute kidney injury
Abstract: Congestive heart failure (HF) is a known risk factor of contrast-induced acute kidney injury (CI-AKI). However, the relationship of the classification and severity of HF with CI-AKI remains under-explored. From January 2009 to April 2019, we recruited patients undergoing elective PCI who had complete pre- and post-operative creatinine data. According to the levels of ejection fraction (EF), HF was classified as HF with reduced EF (HFrEF) [EF < 40%], HF with mid-range EF (HFmrEF) [EF 40–49%] and HF with preserved EF (HFpEF) [EF ≥ 50%]. CI-AKI was defined as an increase of either 25% or 0.5 mg/dL (44.2 μmoI/L) in serum baseline creatinine level within 72 h following the administration of the contrast agent. A total of 3848 patients were included in the study; mean age 67 years old, 33.9% females, 48.1% with HF, and 16.9% with CI-AKI. In multivariate logistic regression analysis, HF was an independent risk factor for CI-AKI (OR 1.316, p value < 0.05). Among patients with HF, decreased levels of EF (OR 0.985, p value < 0.05) and elevated levels of N-terminal pro b-type natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP) (OR 1.168, p value < 0.05) were risk factors for CI-AKI. These results were consistent in subgroup analysis. Patients with HFrEF were more likely to develop CI-AKI than those with HFmrEF or HFpEF (OR 0.852, p value = 0.031). Additionally, lower levels of EF were risk factors for CI-AKI in the HFrEF and HFmrEF groups, but not in the HFpEF group. NT-proBNP was an independent risk factor for CI-AKI in the HFrEF, HFmrEF and HFpEF groups. Elevated levels of NT-proBNP are independent risk factors for CI-AKI irrespective of the classification of HF. Lower levels of EF were risk factors for CI-AKI in the HFrEF and HFmrEF groups, but not in the HFpEF group.
5. Title: Variability in blood lipids affects the neutrophil to lymphocyte ratio in patients undergoing elective percutaneous coronary intervention: A retrospective study
Abstract: 
 Background: Atherosclerosis is associated with chronic inflammation and lipid metabolism. The neutrophil to lymphocyte ratio (NLR) as an indicator of inflammation has been confirmed to be associated with cardiovascular disease prognosis. However, few studies have explored the effects of blood lipid variability on NLR. The aim of this study was to explore the relationship between variability in blood lipid levels and NLR. Methods: The association between variability in blood lipids and NLR was assessed with both univariate and multivariate linear regression. Multivariate linear regression was also performed for a subgroup analysis. Results: The variability of high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C) (regression coefficients [β] 4.008, standard error (SE) 0.503, P-value<0.001) and low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) ([β] 0.626, SE 0.164, P-value<0.001) were risk factors for the NLR value, although baseline LDL-C and HDL-C were not risk factors for NLR values. Variability of HDL-C ([β] 4.328, SE 0.578, P-value<0.001) and LDL-C ([β] 0.660, SE 0.183, P-value<0.001) were risk factors for NLR variability. Subgroup analysis demonstrated that the relationship between variability of LDL-C and NLR was consistent with the trend of the total sample for those with diabetes mellitus, controlled blood lipid, statins, atorvastatin. The relationship between the variability of HDL-C and NLR was consistent with the trend of the total sample in all subgroups. Conclusion: The variability of HDL-C and LDL-C are risk factors for the value and variability of NLR, while the relationship between variability of HDL-C and NLR is more stable than the variability of LDL-C in the subgroup analysis, which provides a new perspective for controlling inflammation in patients undergoing PCI.
6. Title: Seismic Time-Frequency Analysis Based on Entropy-Optimized Paul Wavelet Transform
Abstract: A new method of time-frequency analysis called the entropy-optimized Paul wavelet transform (WT) (EOPWT), is carried out with the use of Paul wavelet-based continuous WT (CWT) on seismic data with the help of the Rényi entropy measurement. Despite its complicated formulation and not being physically intuitive, we extend the parameter definition of Paul wavelet to the real-valued domain, where we demonstrate its superiority over commonly used wavelet functions because of its flexibility in controlling the time-frequency resolution. It can be even regarded as a generalized waveform or an alternative choice with respect to both Ricker and Morlet wavelets. Synthetic seismic trace analysis shows that EOPWT objectively produces a more compact representation of time-frequency localization than other conventional tools in capturing the nonlinear and nonstationary features of input signals. It also offers new possibilities in yielding more reliable seismic attributes in the field of reservoir characterization. We implement spectral decomposition using the proposed method upon a data set from a deeply buried carbonate gas reservoir in southwestern China. Combining the energy absorption analysis method, we obtain the attenuation gradient attribute section indicating gas accumulation. The field data example demonstrates the effectiveness of direct hydrocarbon detection using EOPWT.
7. Title: Hemoglobin A1c Levels Affect Visit-to-visit Variability of Lipid Profiles in Patients Undergoing Elective Percutaneous Coronary Intervention: A Retrospective Study
Abstract: 
 BackgroundBoth hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c) levels and visit-to-visit variability of lipid profiles are risk factors for cardiovascular disease (CVD). We conducted a retrospective cohort study to explore the relationship between HbA1c and lipid variability.MethodsWe retrospectively collected baseline and follow-up data on patients who underwent elective percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) from January 2009 to April 2019. Univariate and multivariate linear regression analyses were performed to assess the association between HbA1c and lipid variability. Subgroup analyses employed multivariate linear regression analyses.ResultsA total of 4,445 patients were enrolled in the study. The median age and value of HbA1c were 64yrs old and 5.9%, respectively, 64% had hypertension and 25.5% diabetes. The variability of low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C), non-high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (non-HDL-C), total cholesterol (TC), and triglyceride (TG) was each significantly higher in patients with HbA1c≥6.5% than those with HbA1c＜6.5% group. Multivariate linear regression indicated that HbA1c level was a potential risk factor for the variability of LDL-C, non-HDL-C, TC and TG, which was independent of the mean values of lipids. Subgroup analyses demonstrated that the relationship between HbA1c and the variability of LDL-C, non-HDL-C, TC, and TG did not importantly vary across several subgroups. These results remained consistent when lipid variability was represented by the standard deviation (SD), coefficient of variation (CV) and variability independent of the mean (VIM), respectively.ConclusionHbA1c is a potential risk factor for the variability of LDL-C, non-HDL-C, TC and TG in patients undergoing elective PCI.
8. Title: A general framework for information extraction using dynamic span graphs
Abstract: We introduce a general framework for several information extraction tasks that share span representations using dynamically constructed span graphs. The graphs are dynamically constructed by selecting the most confident entity spans and linking these nodes with confidence-weighted relation types and coreferences. The dynamic span graph allow coreference and relation type confidences to propagate through the graph to iteratively refine the span representations. This is unlike previous multi-task frameworks for information extraction in which the only interaction between tasks is in the shared first-layer LSTM. Our framework significantly outperforms state-of-the-art on multiple information extraction tasks across multiple datasets reflecting different domains. We further observe that the span enumeration approach is good at detecting nested span entities, with significant F1 score improvement on the ACE dataset.
9. Title: Entity, Relation, and Event Extraction with Contextualized Span Representations
Abstract: We examine the capabilities of a unified, multi-task framework for three information extraction tasks: named entity recognition, relation extraction, and event extraction. Our framework (called DyGIE++) accomplishes all tasks by enumerating, refining, and scoring text spans designed to capture local (within-sentence) and global (cross-sentence) context. Our framework achieves state-of-the-art results across all tasks, on four datasets from a variety of domains. We perform experiments comparing different techniques to construct span representations. Contextualized embeddings like BERT perform well at capturing relationships among entities in the same or adjacent sentences, while dynamic span graph updates model long-range cross-sentence relationships. For instance, propagating span representations via predicted coreference links can enable the model to disambiguate challenging entity mentions. Our code is publicly available at https://github.com/dwadden/dygiepp and can be easily adapted for new tasks or datasets.
10. Title: Author`s Reply
Abstract: Thank you for your careful appraisal. We are extremely glad to receive the insights regarding our article (1), and we appreciate your careful reading and profound comprehension of the periprocedural myocardial infarction incidence. We would like to have the opportunity to respond to the concerns raised in the related letter. 1. We had considered that smoking may play a significant role in periprocedural myocardial infarction when the study had begun; however, no statistical significance was observed for smoking in this cohort. 2. Regarding the role of high-on treatment platelet reactivity (HPR), we are apologetic that we did not detect HPR using platelet reactivity tests before and after antiplatelet drug administration in this retrospective study. We did not regularly detect HPR, because neither platelet function testing nor genetic testing can be recommended for tailoring DAPT, as per the guidelines (2).
11. Title: Text Generation from Knowledge Graphs with Graph Transformers
Abstract: Generating texts which express complex ideas spanning multiple sentences requires a structured representation of their content (document plan), but these representations are prohibitively expensive to manually produce. In this work, we address the problem of generating coherent multi-sentence texts from the output of an information extraction system, and in particular a knowledge graph. Graphical knowledge representations are ubiquitous in computing, but pose a significant challenge for text generation techniques due to their non-hierarchical nature, collapsing of long-distance dependencies, and structural variety. We introduce a novel graph transforming encoder which can leverage the relational structure of such knowledge graphs without imposing linearization or hierarchical constraints. Incorporated into an encoder-decoder setup, we provide an end-to-end trainable system for graph-to-text generation that we apply to the domain of scientific text. Automatic and human evaluations show that our technique produces more informative texts which exhibit better document structure than competitive encoder-decoder methods.
12. Title: PaperRobot: Incremental Draft Generation of Scientific Ideas
Abstract: We present a PaperRobot who performs as an automatic research assistant by (1) conducting deep understanding of a large collection of human-written papers in a target domain and constructing comprehensive background knowledge graphs (KGs); (2) creating new ideas by predicting links from the background KGs, by combining graph attention and contextual text attention; (3) incrementally writing some key elements of a new paper based on memory-attention networks: from the input title along with predicted related entities to generate a paper abstract, from the abstract to generate conclusion and future work, and finally from future work to generate a title for a follow-on paper. Turing Tests, where a biomedical domain expert is asked to compare a system output and a human-authored string, show PaperRobot generated abstracts, conclusion and future work sections, and new titles are chosen over human-written ones up to 30%, 24% and 12% of the time, respectively.
13. Title: Scientific Relation Extraction with Selectively Incorporated Concept Embeddings
Abstract: This paper describes our submission for the SemEval 2018 Task 7 shared task on semantic relation extraction and classification in scientific papers. We extend the end-to-end relation extraction model of (Miwa and Bansal) with enhancements such as a character-level encoding attention mechanism on selecting pretrained concept candidate embeddings. Our official submission ranked the second in relation classification task (Subtask 1.1 and Subtask 2 Senerio 2), and the first in the relation extraction task (Subtask 2 Scenario 1).
14. Title: Multi-Task Identification of Entities, Relations, and Coreference for Scientific Knowledge Graph Construction
Abstract: We introduce a multi-task setup of identifying entities, relations, and coreference clusters in scientific articles. We create SciERC, a dataset that includes annotations for all three tasks and develop a unified framework called SciIE with shared span representations. The multi-task setup reduces cascading errors between tasks and leverages cross-sentence relations through coreference links. Experiments show that our multi-task model outperforms previous models in scientific information extraction without using any domain-specific features. We further show that the framework supports construction of a scientific knowledge graph, which we use to analyze information in scientific literature.
15. Title: Monolingual sentence matching for text simplification
Abstract: This work improves monolingual sentence alignment for text simplification, specifically for text in standard and simple Wikipedia. We introduce a convolutional neural network structure to model similarity between two sentences. Due to the limitation of available parallel corpora, the model is trained in a semi-supervised way, by using the output of a knowledge-based high performance aligning system. We apply the resulting similarity score to rescore the knowledge-based output, and adapt the model by a small hand-aligned dataset. Experiments show that both rescoring and adaptation improve the performance of knowledge-based method.
16. Title: Robust time-frequency analysis of seismic data using general linear chirplet transform
Abstract: Time-frequency analysis has been widely used in seismic processing and interpretation. A good time-frequency representation could preferably characterize geologic spatial distribution and detect hydrocarbon reservoir anomalies. This paper introduces a robust seismic time-frequency analysis method based on General Linear Chirplet Transform (GLCT). The GLCT method is an extended form of Linear Chirplet Transform (LCT), which is a unifying framework encompassing short time Fourier transform (STFT) and continuous wavelet transform (CWT) using chirplet atom as the base function instead of the sinusoidal wave or wavelets. By rotating the chirplet atom at each time-frequency point, GLCT method could adaptively choose the best atom to fit the local time-frequency feature of seismic signals. The algorithm follows such a simple logic and produces a broadband time-frequency spectrum free of cross-term interference, resulting in a good performance characterizing the instantaneous spectral variations. Synthetic data a...
17. Title: Reversibility in Controlled Polymerization Systems: Recent Progress and New Opportunities
Abstract: The field of controlled polymerization is growing and evolving at unprecedented rates, facilitating polymer scientists to engineer the structure and property of polymer materials for a variety of applications. However, the lack of degradability, particularly in vinyl polymers, is a general concern for not only environmental sustainability but also biomedical applications. In recent years, there has been a significant effort to develop reversible polymerization approaches in those well-established controlled polymerization systems. Reversible polymerization typically involves two steps including (i) forward polymerization which converts small monomers into macromolecules, and (ii) depolymerization capable of regenerating original monomers. Furthermore, recycled monomers can be repolymerized into new polymers. In this perspective, we highlight recent developments of reversible polymerization in those controlled polymerization systems and offer insight into the promise and utility of reversible polymerization systems. More importantly, the current challenges and future directions to solve those problems are discussed. We hope this perspective can serve as an “initiator” to promote continuing innovations in this fairly new area.
18. Title: Information Extraction from Scientific Literature for Method Recommendation
Abstract: As a research community grows, more and more papers are published each year. As a result there is increasing demand for improved methods for finding relevant papers, automatically understanding the key ideas and recommending potential methods for a target problem. Despite advances in search engines, it is still hard to identify new technologies according to a researcher's need. Due to the large variety of domains and extremely limited annotated resources, there has been relatively little work on leveraging natural language processing in scientific recommendation. In this proposal, we aim at making scientific recommendations by extracting scientific terms from a large collection of scientific papers and organizing the terms into a knowledge graph. In preliminary work, we trained a scientific term extractor using a small amount of annotated data and obtained state-of-the-art performance by leveraging large amount of unannotated papers through applying multiple semi-supervised approaches. We propose to construct a knowledge graph in a way that can make minimal use of hand annotated data, using only the extracted terms, unsupervised relational signals such as co-occurrence, and structural external resources such as Wikipedia. Latent relations between scientific terms can be learned from the graph. Recommendations will be made through graph inference for both observed and unobserved relational pairs.
19. Title: The UWNLP system at SemEval-2018 Task 7: Neural Relation Extraction Model with Selectively Incorporated Concept Embeddings
Abstract: This paper describes our submission for SemEval 2018 Task 7 shared task on semantic relation extraction and classification in scientific papers. Our model is based on the end-to-end relation extraction model of (Miwa and Bansal, 2016) with several enhancements such as character-level encoding attention mechanism on selecting pretrained concept candidate embeddings. Our official submission ranked the second in relation classification task (Subtask 1.1 and Subtask 2 Senerio 2), and the first in the relation extraction task (Subtask 2 Scenario 1).
20. Title: Vibration Characteristics of Truss Core Panels Based on Laser Additive Manufacturing
Abstract: The dynamic behavior of structures, in particular, that of truss core panels base on laser additive manufacturing (LAM) is a subject of considerable current interest. In the present study, a finite element method (FEM) analysis of a sample constructed using LAM is compared with a modal test. The vibration characteristics of three core geometries: tetrahedral, pyramid and Kagome, are evaluated using the FEM.
