Reviewer papers:
1. Title: PRBoost: Prompt-Based Rule Discovery and Boosting for Interactive Weakly-Supervised Learning
Abstract: Weakly-supervised learning (WSL) has shown promising results in addressing label scarcity on many NLP tasks, but manually designing a comprehensive, high-quality labeling rule set is tedious and difficult. We study interactive weakly-supervised learning—the problem of iteratively and automatically discovering novel labeling rules from data to improve the WSL model. Our proposed model, named PRBOOST, achieves this goal via iterative promptbased rule discovery and model boosting. It uses boosting to identify large-error instances and then discovers candidate rules from them by prompting pre-trained LMs with rule templates. The candidate rules are judged by human experts, and the accepted rules are used to generate complementary weak labels and strengthen the current model. Experiments on four tasks show PRBOOST outperforms state-of-the-art WSL baselines up to 7.1%, and bridges the gaps with fully supervised models.Our Implementation is available at https: //github.com/rz-zhang/PRBoost.
2. Title: Concave Pt–Zn Nanocubes with High‐Index Faceted Pt Skin as Highly Efficient Oxygen Reduction Catalyst
Abstract: High dosage of expensive Pt to catalyze the sluggish oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) on the cathode severely impedes the commercialization of proton exchange membrane fuel cells. Therefore, it is urgent to cut down the Pt catalyst by efficiently improving the ORR activity while maintaining high durability. Herein, magic concave Pt–Zn nanocubes with high‐index faceted Pt skin (Pt78Zn22) are proposed for high‐efficiency catalysis toward proton exchange membrane fuel cells. These unique structural features endow the Pt‐skin Pt78Zn22/KB with a mass activity of 1.18 mA μgPt–1 and a specific activity of 3.64 mA cm–2 for the ORR at 0.9 V (vs RHE). Meanwhile, the H2–O2 fuel cell assembled by this catalyst delivers an ultrahigh peak power density of ≈1449 mW cm–2. Both experiments and theoretical calculations show that the electronic structure of the surface is adjusted, thereby shortening the length of the Pt–Pt bond and reducing the adsorption energy of OH*/O* on the Pt surface. This work demonstrates the synergistic effect of the oxidation‐resistant metal Zn and the construction of Pt‐rich surface engineering. Also, it guides the future development of catalysts for their practical applications in energy conversion technologies and beyond.
3. Title: Vertiport Selection in Hybrid Air-Ground Transportation Networks via Mathematical Programs with Equilibrium Constraints
Abstract: Urban Air Mobility is a concept that promotes aerial modes of transport in urban areas. In these areas, the location and capacity of the vertiports–where the travelers embark and disembark the aircraft–not only affect the flight delays of the aircraft, but can also aggravate the congestion of ground vehicles by creating extra ground travel demands. We introduce a mathematical model for selecting the vertiports location and capacity that minimizes the traffic congestion in hybrid air-ground transportation networks. Our model is based on a mathematical program with bilinear equilibrium constraints. Furthermore, we show how to compute a global optimal solution of this mathematical program by solving a mixed integer linear program. We demonstrate our results via the Anaheim transportation network model, which contains more than 400 nodes and 900 links.
4. Title: Learning Deep Implicit Fourier Neural Operators (IFNOs) with Applications to Heterogeneous Material Modeling
Abstract: Constitutive modeling based on continuum mechanics theory has been a classical approach for modeling the mechanical responses of materials. However, when constitutive laws are unknown or when defects and/or high degrees of heterogeneity are present, these classical models may become inaccurate. In this work, we propose to use data-driven modeling, which directly utilizes high-fidelity simulation and/or experimental measurements to predict a material’s response without using conventional constitutive models. Specifically, the material response is modeled by learning the implicit mappings between loading conditions and the resultant displacement and/or damage fields, with the neural network serving as a surrogate for a solution operator. To model the complex responses due to material heterogeneity and defects, we develop a novel deep neural operator architecture, which we coin as the Implicit Fourier Neural Operator (IFNO). In the IFNO, the increment between layers is modeled as an integral operator to capture the long-range dependencies in the feature space. As the network gets deeper, the limit of IFNO becomes a fixed point equation that yields an implicit neural operator and naturally mimics the displacement/damage fields solving procedure in material modeling problems. To obtain an efficient implementation, we parameterize the integral kernel of this integral operator directly in the Fourier space and interpret the network as discretized integral (nonlocal) differential equations, which consequently allow for the fast Fourier transformation (FFT) and accelerated learning techniques for deep networks. We demonstrate the performance of our proposed method for a number of examples, including hyperelastic, anisotropic and brittle materials. As an application, we further employ the proposed approach to learn the material models directly from digital image correlation (DIC) tracking measurements, and show that the learned solution operators substantially outperform the conventional constitutive models in predicting displacement fields.
5. Title: Soluble and Perfluorinated Polyelectrolyte for Safe and High-Performance Li-O2 Batteries.
Abstract: The severe performance degradation of high-capacity Li-O2 batteries induced by Li dendrite growth and concentration polarization from the low Li+ transfer number of conventional electrolytes hinder their practical applications. Herein, lithiated Nafion (LN) with the sulfonic group immobilized on the perfluorinated backbone has been designed as a soluble lithium salt for preparing a less flammable polyelectrolyte solution, which not only simultaneously achieves a high Li+ transfer number (0.84) and conductivity (2.5 mS cm-1 ), but also the perfluorinated anion of LN produces a LiF-rich SEI for protecting the Li anode from dendrite growth. Thus, the Li-O2 battery with a LN-based electrolyte achieves an all-round performance improvement, like low charge overpotential (0.18 V), large discharge capacity (9508 mAh g-1 ), and excellent cycling performance (225 cycles). Besides, the fabricated pouch-type Li-air cells exhibit promising applications to power electronic equipment with satisfactory safety.
6. Title: Hedgehog-inspired immunomagnetic beads for high-efficient capture and release of exosomes
Abstract: Exosomes are small extracellular vesicles secreted by cells, they play an important regulatory role in the physiological and pathological processes of the body, and participate in the occurrence and development...
7. Title: A Low-Volatile and Durable Deep Eutectic Electrolyte for High-Performance Lithium-Oxygen Battery.
Abstract: The lithium-oxygen battery (LOB) with a high theoretical energy density (∼3500 Wh kg-1) has been regarded as a strong competitor for next-generation energy storage systems. However, its performance is still far from satisfactory due to the lack of stable electrolyte that can simultaneously withstand the strong oxidizing environment during battery operation, evaporation by the semiopen feature, and high reactivity of lithium metal anode. Here, we have developed a deep eutectic electrolyte (DEE) that can fulfill all the requirements to enable the long-term operation of LOBs by just simply mixing solid N-methylacetamide (NMA) and lithium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide (LiTFSI) at a certain ratio. The unique interaction of the polar groups in the NMA with the cations and anions in the LiTFSI enables DEE formation, and this NMA-based DEE possesses high ionic conductivity, good thermal, chemical, and electrochemical stability, and good compatibility with the lithium metal anode. As a result, the LOBs with the NMA-based DEE present a high discharge capacity (8647 mAh g-1), excellent rate performance, and superb cycling lifetime (280 cycles). The introduction of DEE into LOBs will inject new vitality into the design of electrolytes and promote the development of high-performance LOBs.
8. Title: A Survey on Programmatic Weak Supervision
Abstract: Labeling training data has become one of the major roadblocks to using machine learning. Among various weak supervision paradigms, programmatic weak supervision (PWS) has achieved remarkable success in easing the manual labeling bottleneck by programmatically synthesizing training labels from multiple potentially noisy supervision sources. This paper presents a comprehensive survey of recent advances in PWS. In particular, we give a brief introduction of the PWS learning paradigm, and review representative approaches for each component within PWS’s learning workflow. In addition, we discuss complementary learning paradigms for tackling limited labeled data scenarios and how these related approaches can be used in conjunction with PWS. Finally, we identify several critical challenges that remain under-explored in the area to hopefully inspire future research directions in the field.
9. Title: Controllable Environment Protein Corona-Disguised Immunomagnetic Beads for High-Performance Circulating Tumor Cell Enrichment.
Abstract: The enrichment performance of immunomagnetic beads (IMBs) in blood samples is usually challenging due to the ungoverned, in situ-formed protein corona, as it generally leads to negative effects, such as impeded targeting capacity and unwanted nonspecific absorption. On the contrary, a controlled protein premodification of IMBs with diverse functional environment (blood) proteins endows the composites with a new biological identity and may improve the anti-nonspecific ability, resulting in promising isolation benefits for circulating tumor cell (CTC) enrichment and downstream analyses. Specifically, fetal bovine serum and the four most abundant blood proteins, including human serum albumin, fibrinogen, immunoglobulin, and transferrin, were separately applied in this work. Conclusively, the biological properties of the applied protein corona camouflage have a great influence on the capture performance of IMBs, and certain proteins can enhance the enrichment performance to a large extent. Promisingly, human serum albumin-camouflaged IMBs (HSA-PIMBs) achieved a capture efficiency of 84.0-90.0% and significantly minimized nonspecific absorbed leukocytes to 164-264 in blood samples (0.5 mL, 25-55 model CTCs). Furthermore, HSA-PIMBs isolated 62-505 CTCs and 13-31 leukocytes from the blood samples of five cancer patients. The novel environment camouflage strategy provides a new insight into protein corona utilization and may improve the performance of targeted nanomaterials in a complex biological environment.
10. Title: Three Birds with One Stone: An Integrated Cathode-Electrolyte Structure for High-Performance Solid-State Lithium-Oxygen Batteries.
Abstract: Constructing solid-state lithium-oxygen batteries (SSLOBs) holds a great promise to solve the safety and stability bottlenecks faced by lithium-oxygen batteries (LOBs) with volatile and flammable organic liquid electrolytes. However, the realization of high-performance SSLOBs is full of challenges due to the poor ionic conductivity of solid electrolytes, large interfacial resistance, and limited reaction sites of cathodes. Here, a flexible integrated cathode-electrolyte structure (ICES) is designed to enable the tight connection between the cathode and electrolyte through supporting them on a 3D SiO2 nanofibers (NFs) framework. The intimate cathode-electrolyte structure and the porous SiO2 NFs scaffold combination are favorable for decreasing interfacial resistance and increasing reaction sites. Moreover, the 3D SiO2 NFs framework can also behave as an efficient inorganic filler to enhance the ionic conductivity of the solid polymer electrolyte and its ability to inhibit lithium dendrite growth. As a result, the elaborately designed ICES can simultaneously tackle the issues that limit the performance liberation of SSLOBs, making the batteries deliver a high discharge capacity and a long lifetime of 145 cycles with a cycling capacity of 1000 mAh g-1 at 60 °C, much superior to coventional SSLOBs (50 cycles).
11. Title: A Physics-Guided Neural Operator Learning Approach to Model Biological Tissues from Digital Image Correlation Measurements
Abstract: We present a data-driven workflow to biological tissue modeling, which aims to predict the displacement field based on digital image correlation (DIC) measurements under unseen loading scenarios, without postulating a specific constitutive model form nor possessing knowledges on the material microstructure. To this end, a material database is constructed from the DIC displacement tracking measurements of multiple biaxial stretching protocols on a porcine tricuspid valve anterior leaflet, with which we build a neural operator learning model. The material response is modeled as a solution operator from the loading to the resultant displacement field, with the material microstructure properties learned implicitly from the data and naturally embedded in the network parameters. Using various combinations of loading protocols, we compare the predictivity of this framework with finite element analysis based on the phenomenological Fung-type model. From in-distribution tests, the predictivity of our approach presents good generalizability to different loading conditions and outperforms the conventional constitutive modeling at approximately one order
12. Title: Lipase-catalyzed hydrazine insertion for the synthesis of N'-alkyl benzohydrazides.
Abstract: N'-alkyl benzohydrazides are classic organic compounds that have been widely utilized in organic chemistry. In this study, an efficient method was developed for the synthesis of N'-alkyl benzohydrazides by hydrazine insertion catalyzed by lipase. Under the optimal conditions (Morita-Baylis-Hillman ketone [1 mmol], phenylhydrazine [1.3 mmol], N,N-dimethylformamide [2 mL], lipase [20 mg], room temperature, 12 h), satisfactory yields (71%-97%) and substrate tolerance were obtained when porcine pancreatic lipase was used as biocatalyst. These findings imply the great potential for the lipase-catalyzed synthesis of N'-alkyl benzohydrazides and extend the utilization of lipase in organic chemistry. This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
13. Title: 5G Smart Grid Network Slice Backup Method Based on the Quality of Service
Abstract: In the 5G mobile communication network virtualization scenario, how to deploy network slicing with high quality is a prerequisite for large-scale commercial use of 5G in the future. Cut for 5G networks. The quality of the chip deployment is based on the NFV backup configuration of the power business. In ultra-reliable and low-latency scenarios, high-quality VNF backup configurations in slices are realized. And on this basis, construct a mathematical model of network slicing deployment, which will benefit. Solve with a highly reliable backup algorithm based on reinforcement learning, and find the deployment plan with the lowest deployment cost of network slicing. Simulation experiments show that the deployment strategy is ensuring deployment security. Under the premise of reducing deployment costs, while obtaining better security benefits and deployment profitability.
14. Title: Short, Colorful, and Irreverent! A Comparative Analysis of New Users on WallstreetBets During the Gamestop Short-squeeze
Abstract: WallStreetBets (WSB) is a Reddit community that primarily discusses high-risk options and stock trading. In January 2021, it attracted worldwide attention as one of the epicentres of a significant short squeeze on US markets. Following this event, the number of users and their activity increased exponentially. In this paper, we study the changes caused in the WSB community by such an increase in activity. We perform a comparative analysis between long-term users and newcomers and examine their respective writing styles, topics, and susceptibility to community feedback. We report a significant difference in the post length and the number of emojis between the regular and new users joining WSB. Newer users’ activity also closely follows the affected companies’ stock prices. Finally, although community feedback affects the choices of topics for all users, new users are less prone to select their subsequent message topics based on past community feedback.
15. Title: Design and Performance Analysis of Lamina Emergent Torsional Joints Based on Double-Laminated Material Structure
Abstract: Flexibility and accuracy are two key aspects of the performances of compliant joints. In order to obtain high flexibility while maintain high accuracy, this paper proposes a design method to improve the tensile stiffness of Lamina Emergent Torsional (LET) joint by utilizing double-laminated material structure. The joint is made of a LET joint and a layer of flexible H18 aluminum foil fixing on it (called double-laminated LET, DL-LET). The kinetostatic model for the joint is given, and the equations needed to calculate the equivalent spring constant are derived. The model is verified using finite element analysis (FEA). The results obtained through two different ways coincide with each other very well. The results show that DL-LET and LET joints have similar bending stiffness, while the tensile stiffness of the DL-LET joint is much larger than that of the LET joint. The results are validated by tensile tests. Finally, to further demonstrate the extension of this idea, a DL-Triple-LET joint is presented and compared to the Triple-LET joint.
16. Title: Multi-nanocavities and Multi-defects Synergetic Enhancement for the Electromagnetic Absorption of the rGO-NG Film.
Abstract: Dielectric loss is an important way to eliminate electromagnetic (EM) pollution. In order to achieve high dielectric loss, a graphene film (GF) reduced graphene oxide-N doped graphene (rGO-NG) was constructed from graphene oxide-Ni@polydopamine (GO-Ni@PDA) via the in-situ synthesis of hollow graphene spheres between graphene sheets. This in-situ was achieved by means of electrostatic self-assembly and metal-catalyzed crystallization. Owing to the synergetic effect of multi-nanocavities and multi-defects, the prepared rGO-NG film shows an average shielding effectiveness (SE) of 50.0 dB in the range of 8.2-12.4 GHz with a thickness of 12.2 μm, and the SE reflection (SER) is only 7.3 dB on average. It also exhibits an average dielectric loss tangent (tan δ) of 23.1, which is 26 and 105 times higher than those of rGO and rGO-Ni, respectively. This work provides a simple but effective route to develop high performance graphene-based materials for application as an electromagnetic interference (EMI) shielding film in today's electronic devices.
17. Title: Acoustic-Electrical Joint Localization Method of Partial Discharge in Power Transformer Considering Multi-Path Propagation Impact
Abstract: Efficient and accurate localization of partial discharge (PD) is of paramount importance to ensure the safe operation of power transformers. However, the multi-path propagation effect introduced by the reflection, refraction and diffraction of the ultrasonic signal may add significant computational complexity to the localization process and degrade the localization accuracy. This paper proposes an acoustic- electrical joint method for partial discharge location in the power transformer with the full consideration of the multi-path propagation impact. Unlike the conventional error analysis methods, a partial discharge localization model is proposed for characterizing the multipath propagation impact without the prior knowledge of the transcendental error probability. Based on the matrix inequality transformation and relaxation, the high-dimensional nonlinear localization equations are transformed into a set of second-order convex optimization equations that can be solved using the convex second-order cone program (SOCP). The proposed solution can significantly reduce the computational complexity and improve the localization accuracy as well as avoid the local optimum and slow convergence. The solution is assessed through extensive experiments based on simulations, testbed and trial deployment in comparison with the existing solutions with the localization error of about 0.1 m.
18. Title: The Fabrication of PMo11Fe Cluster Supporting on SBA-15 and Catalytic Epoxidation of Cyclooctene with H2O2 as Oxidant
Abstract: The transition metal iron substituted polyoxometalates cluster (PMo11Fe) was immobilized on NH2 functionalized SBA-15 with the post-modified method, the resulting composite materials, abbreviated as PMo11Fe/SBA. Multiple characteristic methods including X-ray powder diffraction, transmission electron microscopy and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy were used to characterize the composite PMo11Fe/SBA, it is concluded that PMo11Fe cluster was supported on the NH2 functionalized SBA-15, and the Keggin structure of PMo11Fe cluster kept retained during the immobilized process. The cyclooctene epoxidation results with H2O2 as the oxidant demonstrated that PMo11Fe/SBA performed better catalytic activities and recyclability, the conversion of cyclooctene kept about 50% after several recycled reactions. The superior recyclability of PMo11Fe/SBA could be attributed to the multiple electrostatic and coordinative interactions between PMo11Fe clusters and functionalities –NH2 located at the 3D pore wall of SBA-15. Besides, the catalytic activities and stability could be improved through the partial substitute of transition metal Fe instead of Mo atom in phosphomolybdic acids clusters.
19. Title: Analysis of residual stresses and distortions of a titanium alloy ring-stiffened cylindrical shell
Abstract: Abstract Ring-stiffened cylindrical shell is the main pressure structure of underwater carrier equipment, and the residual stress and deformation introduced by welding of ring-ribbed frame and cylinder body pose a great threat to the performance and safety of the structure. In this paper, finite element software is used to numerically simulate the residual stress and deformation caused by fillet welding. The influence of welding position, constraint tooling and post-weld heat treatment PWHT on the residual stress and deformation is analyzed systematically. The results show that the gravity has little effect on the welding residual stress and deformation, but it has a significant impact on deformation uniformity. Under the action of restraint, the welding distortion is effectively controlled, but it will lead to the increase of the overall stress level of the structure simultaneously. Heat treatment can dramatically diminish the welding residual stress at the expense of deformation, which may result in structural maladjustment.
20. Title: Interfacing Finite Elements with Deep Neural Operators for Fast Multiscale Modeling of Mechanics Problems
Abstract: Multiscale modeling is an effective approach for investigating multiphysics systems with largely disparate size features, where models with different resolutions or heterogeneous descriptions are coupled together for predicting the system’s response. The solver with lower fidelity (coarse) is responsible for simulating domains with homogeneous features, whereas the expensive high-fidelity (fine) model describes microscopic features with refined discretization, often making the overall cost prohibitively high, especially for timedependent problems. In this work, we explore the idea of multiscale modeling with machine learning and employ DeepONet, a neural operator, as an efficient surrogate of the expensive solver. DeepONet is trained offline using data acquired from the fine solver for learning the underlying and possibly unknown finescale dynamics. It is then coupled with standard PDE solvers for predicting the multiscale systems with new boundary/initial conditions in the coupling stage. The proposed framework significantly reduces the computational cost of multiscale simulations since the DeepONet inference cost is negligible, facilitating readily the incorporation of a plurality of interface conditions and coupling schemes. We present various benchmarks to assess accuracy and speedup, and in particular we develop a coupling algorithm for a timedependent problem, and we also demonstrate coupling of a continuum model (finite element methods, FEM) with a neural operator representation of a particle system (Smoothed Particle Hydrodynamics, SPH) for a uniaxial tension problem with hyperelastic material. What makes this approach unique is that a well-trained over-parametrized DeepONet can generalize well and make predictions at a negligible cost. keywords: Machine Learning, Neural Operator, DeepONet, Concurrent Multiscale Coupling, Finite Element Model, Domain Decomposition ∗Corresponding author: george karniadakis@brown.edu Preprint submitted to Elsevier March 2, 2022 ar X iv :2 20 3. 00 00 3v 1 [ cs .C E ] 2 5 Fe b 20 22
