Reviewer papers:
1. Title: Learning Sinkhorn divergences for supervised change point detection
Abstract: Many modern applications require detecting change points in complex sequential data. Most existing methods for change point detection are unsupervised and, as a consequence, lack any information regarding what kind of changes we want to detect or if some kinds of changes are safe to ignore. This often results in poor change detection performance. We present a novel change point detection framework that uses true change point instances as supervision for learning a ground metric such that Sinkhorn divergences can be then used in two-sample tests on sliding windows to detect change points in an online manner. Our method can be used to learn a sparse metric which can be useful for both feature selection and interpretation in high-dimensional change point detection settings. Experiments on simulated as well as real world sequences show that our proposed method can substantially improve change point detection performance over existing unsupervised change point detection methods using only few labeled change point instances.
2. Title: Delta Distancing: A Lifting Approach to Localizing Items from User Comparisons
Abstract: A common problem in recommendation systems is to learn a model of user preferences based only on comparisons of the relative attractiveness of different items. We consider this problem in the context of an ideal point model of user preference, where each user can be represented as a point in a lowdimensional space together with a set of items. In this model, the closer an item is to a user’s ideal point, the more that user prefers the item. When an embedding of items is known a priori, the problem of localizing a user’s ideal point from comparisons amongst items is well studied. However, relatively little work exists on learning embeddings for new items based only on such comparisons. In this paper, we consider the problem of embedding a set of items using paired comparisons from a set of known users. Specifically, we present a novel convex lifted method of learning the embedding representation p1, . . . , pn ∈ R of n items given noisy responses of the form “user uk prefers item pi to item pj” for an arbitrary set of users {uk} in R. We provide a range of simulations that validate the efficacy of our approach.
3. Title: Deep inference of latent dynamics with spatio-temporal super-resolution using selective backpropagation through time
Abstract: LFADS models benefit from appropriate hyperparameter (HP) tuning, as optimal HP combinations can vary from dataset to dataset [2, 3]. As mentioned in the main text, we use AutoLFADS [3] to ensure appropriate HP tuning. The framework combines a regularization strategy (coordinated dropout; CD [2]) with a largescale framework for optimizing model hyperparameters (population-based training; PBT [4]). The details of these strategies are outlined in previous work; here we provide specifics for replicating our findings.
4. Title: Validating a Wheelchair In-Seat Activity Tracker.
Abstract: BACKGROUND
Wheelchair users often experience prolonged periods of stationary sitting. Such periods are accompanied with increased loading of the ischial tuberosities. This can lead to the development of pressure ulcers which can cause complications such as sepsis. Periodic pressure offloading is recommended to reduce the onset of pressure ulcers. Experts recommend the periodic execution of different movements to provide the needed pressure offloading. Wheelchair users, however, might not remember to perform these recommended movements in terms of both quality and quantity. A system that can detect such movements could provide valuable feedback to both wheelchair users as well as clinicians.


PURPOSE
The objective of this study was to present and validate the WiSAT - a system for characterizing in-seat activity for wheelchair users. WiSAT is designed to detect two kinds of movements - weight shifts and in-seat movements. Weight shifts are movements that offload pressure on ischial tuberosities by 30% as compared to upright sitting and are maintained for 15 seconds. In-seat movements are shorter transient movements that involve either a change in the center of pressure on the sitting buttocks or a transient reduction in total load by 30%. This study validates the use of WiSAT in manual wheelchairs.


METHODS
WiSAT has a sensor mat which was inserted beneath a wheelchair cushion. Readings from these sensors were used by WiSAT algorithms to predict weight shifts and in-seat movements. These weight shifts and in-seat movements were validated against a high-resolution interface pressure mat in a dataset that resembles real world usage.


RESULTS
The proposed system achieved weight shift precision and recall scores of 81% and 80% respectively while in-seat movement scores were predicted with a mean absolute error of 22%.


CONCLUSION
Results showed that WiSAT provides sufficient accuracy in characterizing in-seat activity in terms of weight shifts and in-seat movement.
5. Title: Semi-supervised sequence classification through change point detection
Abstract: Sequential sensor data is generated in a wide variety of practical applications. A fundamental challenge involves learning effective classifiers for such sequential data. While deep learning has led to impressive performance gains in recent years in domains such as speech, this has relied on the availability of large datasets of sequences with high-quality labels. In many applications, however, the associated class labels are often extremely limited, with precise labelling/segmentation being too expensive to perform at a high volume. However, large amounts of unlabeled data may still be available. In this paper we propose a novel framework for semi-supervised learning in such contexts. In an unsupervised manner, change point detection methods can be used to identify points within a sequence corresponding to likely class changes. We show that change points provide examples of similar/dissimilar pairs of sequences which, when coupled with labeled, can be used in a semi-supervised classification setting. Leveraging the change points and labeled data, we form examples of similar/dissimilar sequences to train a neural network to learn improved representations for classification. We provide extensive synthetic simulations and show that the learned representations are superior to those learned through an autoencoder and obtain improved results on both simulated and real-world human activity recognition datasets.
6. Title: SDNs, Clouds, and Big Data: New Opportunities
Abstract: We are at the cusp of a technological revolution driven mainly by advances in hardware technology, network architectural support, and the ability to process big data. The hardware industry, driven by Moore's law, continues to provide steadily increasing computing capability with diminishing costs. With the support of hardware advances, platforms for distributed storage and processing of big data, such as Apache Hadoop, provide the ability to scalably and reliably process massive amounts of data using a cluster of commodity servers. In parallel, a revolution is ongoing in the networking world. The emergence of the software defined networking (SDN) architecture promises to rectify the ossified architecture of the Internet allowing network managers to flexibly program the network. In this paper, we argue that SDN and big data, two technological trends that promise to revolutionize all aspects of modern life, can leverage the freedom afforded by each other to jointly increase their value proposition. In particular, SDN can utilize the large amounts of operational data to optimize the network behavior, while big data platforms can benefit from the flexible architectural support provided by SDN. In this paper, we will provide a brief self-contained exposition on opportunities for SDN and big data to synergize and jointly optimize. We will also point out open research issues and will identify future directions of work.
7. Title: Building programmable wireless networks: an architectural survey
Abstract: In recent times, there is increasing consensus that the traditional Internet architecture needs to be evolved for it to sustain unstinted growth and innovation. A major reason for the perceived architectural ossification is the lack of the ability to program the network as a system. This situation has resulted partly from historical decisions in the original Internet design which emphasized decentralized network operations through colocated data and control planes on each network device. The situation for wireless networks is no different resulting in a lot of complexity and a plethora of largely incompatible wireless technologies. With traditional architectures providing limited support for programmability, there is a broad realization in the wireless community that future programmable wireless networks would require significant architectural innovations. In this paper, we will present an unified overview of the programmability solutions that have been proposed at the device and the network level. In particular, we will discuss software-defined radio (SDR), cognitive radio (CR), programmable MAC processor, and programmable routers as device-level programmability solutions, and software-defined networking (SDN), cognitive wireless networking (CWN), virtualizable wireless networking (VWN) and cloud-based wireless networking (CbWN) as network-level programmability solutions. We provide both a self-contained exposition of these topics as well as a broad survey of the application of these trends in modern wireless networks.
