Reviewer papers:
1. Title: Inverse Extended Kalman Filter
Abstract: Recent advances in counter-adversarial systems have garnered significant research interest in inverse filtering from a Bayesian perspective. For example, interest in estimating the adversary’s Kalman filter tracked estimate with the purpose of predicting the adversary’s future steps has led to recent formulations of inverse Kalman filter (IKF). In this context of inverse filtering, we address the key challenges of nonlinear process dynamics and unknown input to the forward filter by proposing inverse extended Kalman filter (I-EKF). We derive I-EKF with and without an unknown input by considering nonlinearity in both forward and inverse state-space models. In the process, I-KF-withunknown-input is also obtained. We then provide theoretical stability guarantees using both bounded nonlinearity and unknown matrix approaches. We further generalize these formulations and results to the case of higher-order, Gaussian-sum, and dithered I-EKFs. Numerical experiments validate our methods for various proposed inverse filters using the recursive Cramér-Rao lower bound as a benchmark.
2. Title: Controller Manipulation Attack on Reconfigurable Intelligent Surface Aided Wireless Communication
Abstract: In this paper, we introduce a new attack called controller manipulation attack (CMA) on a Reconfigurable Intelligent Surface (RIS) assisted communication system between a transmitter and a receiver. An attacker has the potential to manipulate the RIS controller and modify the phase shift induced by the RIS elements. The goal of the attacker is to minimize the data rate at the receiver, subject to a constraint on the attack detection probability at the receiver. We consider two different attack detection models: (i) composite hypothesis testing based attack detection in a given fading block for known channel gains, and (ii) SNR moment based detection over possibly multiple fading blocks. In the first case, a simple energy detector turns out to be uniformly most powerful (UMP) and the attack against this energy detector is designed via a novel optimization formulation and a semidefinite relaxation based solution. In the second case, we consider threshold detection using moments of SNR; various SNR moments under no attack are obtained analytically for large RIS and then used to formulate the attack design problem as a linear program. Finally, numerical results illustrate the performance and trade-offs associated with the attack schemes, and also demonstrate their efficacy.
3. Title: OptM3Sec: Optimizing Multicast IRS-Aided Multiantenna DFRC Secrecy Channel with Multiple Eavesdroppers
Abstract: With the use of common signaling methods for dual-function radarcommunications (DFRC) systems, the susceptibility of eavesdropping on messages aimed at legitimate users has worsened. For DFRC systems, the radar target may act as an eavesdropper (ED) that receives a high-energy signal thereby leading to additional challenges. Unlike prior works, we consider a multicast multi-antenna DFRC system with multiple EDs. We then propose a physical layer design approach to maximize the secrecy rate by installing intelligent reflecting surfaces in the radar channels. Our optimization of multiple ED multicast multi-antenna DFRC secrecy rate (OptM3Sec) approach solves this highly nonconvex problem with respect to the precoding matrices. Our numerical experiments demonstrate the feasibility of our algorithm in maximizing the secrecy rate in this DFRC setup.
4. Title: Age-of-information minimization via opportunistic sampling by an energy harvesting source
Abstract: Herein, minimization of time-averaged age-ofinformation (AoI) in an energy harvesting (EH) source equipped remote sensing setting is considered. The EH source opportunistically samples one or multiple processes over discrete time instants, and sends the status updates to a sink node over a time-varying wireless link. At any discrete time instant, the EH node decides whether to ascertain the link quality using its stored energy (called probing) and then, decides whether to sample a process and communicate the data based on the channel probe outcome. The trade-off is between the freshness of information available at the sink node and the available energy at the energy buffer of the source node. To this end, infinite horizon Markov decision process (MDP) theory is used to formulate the problem of minimization of time-averaged expected AoI for a single energy harvesting source node. The following two scenarios are considered: (i) energy arrival process and channel fading process are independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) across time, (ii) energy arrival process and channel fading process are Markovian. In the i.i.d. setting, after probing a channel, the optimal source node sampling policy is shown to be a threshold policy involving the instantaneous age of the process, the available energy in the buffer and the instantaneous channel quality as the decision variables. Also, for unknown channel state and energy harvesting characteristics, a variant of the Q-learning algorithm is proposed for the two-stage action taken by the source, that seeks to learn the optimal status update policy over time. For Markovian channel and Markovian energy arrival processes, the problem is again formulated as an MDP, and a learning algorithm is provided to handle unknown dynamics. Finally, numerical results are provided to demonstrate the policy structures and performance trade-offs.
5. Title: Compressive Sensing Based Adaptive Defence Against Adversarial Images
Abstract: Herein, security of deep neural network against adversarial attack is considered. Existing compressive sensing based defence schemes assume that adversarial perturbations are usually on high frequency components, whereas recently it has been shown that low frequency perturbations are more effective. This paper proposes a novel Compressive sensing based Adaptive Defence (CAD) algorithm which combats distortion in frequency domain instead of time domain. Unlike existing literature, the proposed CAD algorithm does not use information about the type of attack such as `0, `2, `∞ etc. CAD algorithm uses exponential weight algorithm for exploration and exploitation to identify the type of attack, compressive sampling matching pursuit (CoSaMP) to recover the coefficients in spectral domain, and modified basis pursuit using a novel constraint for `0, `∞ norm attack. Tight performance bounds for various recovery schemes meant for various attack types are also provided. Experimental results against five state-of-the-art white box attacks on MNIST and CIFAR-10 show that the proposed CAD algorithm achieves excellent classification accuracy and generates good quality reconstructed image with much lower computation.
6. Title: Decentralized, Hybrid MAC Design with Reduced State Information Exchange for Low-Delay IoT Applications
Abstract: We consider a system of several collocated nodes sharing a time slotted wireless channel, and seek a MAC that (i) provides low mean delay, (ii) has distributed control (i.e., there is no central scheduler), and (iii) does not require explicit exchange of state information or control signals. The design of such MAC protocols must keep in mind the need for contention access at light traffic, and scheduled access in heavy traffic, leading to the long-standing interest in hybrid, adaptive MACs. We first propose EZMAC, a simple extension of an existing decentralized, hybrid MAC called ZMAC. Next, motivated by our results on delay and throughput optimality in partially observed, constrained queuing networks, we develop another decentralized MAC protocol that we term QZMAC. A method to improve the short-term fairness of QZMAC is proposed and analysed, and the resulting modified algorithm is shown to possess better fairness properties than QZMAC. The theory developed to reduce delay is also shown to work in the presence of transmission errors and fast fading. Extensions to handle time critical traffic (alarms, for example) and hidden nodes are also discussed. Practical implementation issues, such as handling Clear Channel Assessment (CCA) errors, are outlined. We implement and demonstrate the performance of QZMAC on a test bed consisting of CC2420 based Crossbow telosB motes, running the 6TiSCH communication stack on the Contiki operating system over the 2.4GHz ISM band. Finally, using simulations, we show that both protocols achieve mean delays much lower than those achieved by ZMAC, and QZMAC provides mean delays very close to the minimum achievable in this setting, i.e., that of the centralized complete knowledge scheduler. Keywords− Sensor Networks, Partially Observable MDPs (POMDPs), Medium Access Control, Throughput Optimality, Optimal Polling, Internet of Things, 6TiSCH.
7. Title: Design of False Data Injection Attack on Distributed Process Estimation
Abstract: Herein, design of false data injection attack on a distributed cyber-physical system is considered. A stochastic process with linear dynamics and Gaussian noise is measured by multiple agent nodes, each equipped with multiple sensors. The agent nodes form a multi-hop network among themselves. Each agent node computes an estimate of the process by using its sensor observation and messages obtained from neighboring nodes, via Kalman-consensus filtering. An external attacker, capable of arbitrarily manipulating the sensor observations of some or all agent nodes, injects errors into those sensor observations. The goal of the attacker is to steer the estimates at the agent nodes as close as possible to a pre-specified value, while respecting a constraint on the attack detection probability. To this end, a constrained optimization problem is formulated to find the optimal parameter values of a certain class of linear attacks. The parameters of linear attack are learnt on-line via a combination of stochastic approximation based update of a Lagrange multiplier, and an optimization technique involving either the Karush-Kuhn-Tucker (KKT) conditions or online stochastic gradient descent. The problem turns out to be convex for some special cases. Desired convergence of the proposed algorithms are proved by exploiting the convexity and properties of stochastic approximation algorithms. Finally, numerical results demonstrate the efficacy of the attack.
8. Title: Centralized active tracking of a Markov chain with unknown dynamics
Abstract: In this paper, selection of an active sensor subset for tracking a discrete time, finite state Markov chain having an unknown transition probability matrix (TPM) is considered. A total of N sensors are available for making observations of the Markov chain, out of which a subset of sensors are activated each time in order to perform reliable estimation of the process. The trade-off is between activating more sensors to gather more observations for the remote estimation, and restricting sensor usage in order to save energy and bandwidth consumption. The problem is formulated as a constrained minimization problem, where the objective is the long-run averaged mean-squared error (MSE) in estimation, and the constraint is on sensor activation rate. A Lagrangian relaxation of the problem is solved by an artful blending of two tools: Gibbs sampling for MSE minimization and an on-line version of expectation maximization (EM) to estimate the unknown TPM. Finally, the Lagrange multiplier is updated using slower timescale stochastic approximation in order to satisfy the sensor activation rate constraint. The on-line EM algorithm, though adapted from literature, can estimate vector-valued parameters even under time-varying dimension of the sensor observations. Numerical results demonstrate approximately 1 dB better error performance than uniform sensor sampling and comparable error performance (within 2 dB bound) against complete sensor observation. This makes the proposed algorithm amenable to practical implementation.
9. Title: Efficient detection of adversarial images
Abstract: In this paper, detection of deception attack on deep neural network (DNN) based image classification in autonomous and cyber-physical systems is considered. Several studies have shown the vulnerability of DNN to malicious deception attacks. In such attacks, some or all pixel values of an image are modified by an external attacker, so that the change is almost invisible to the human eye but significant enough for a DNN-based classifier to misclassify it. This paper first proposes a novel pre-processing technique that facilitates the detection of such modified images under any DNN-based image classifier as well as the attacker model. The proposed pre-processing algorithm involves a certain combination of principal component analysis (PCA)-based decomposition of the image, and random perturbation based detection to reduce computational complexity. Next, an adaptive version of this algorithm is proposed where a random number of perturbations are chosen adaptively using a doubly-threshold policy, and the threshold values are learnt via stochastic approximation in order to minimize the expected number of perturbations subject to constraints on the false alarm and missed detection probabilities. Numerical experiments show that the proposed detection scheme outperforms a competing algorithm while achieving reasonably low computational complexity.
10. Title: Quickest detection of false data injection attack in remote state estimation
Abstract: In this paper, quickest detection of false data injection attack on remote state estimation is considered. A set of $N$ sensors make noisy linear observations of a discrete-time linear process with Gaussian noise, and report the observations to a remote estimator. The challenge is the presence of a few potentially malicious sensors which can start strategically manipulating their observations at a random time in order to skew the estimates. The quickest attack detection problem for a known linear attack scheme is posed as a constrained Markov decision process in order to minimize the expected detection delay subject to a false alarm constraint, with the state involving the probability belief at the estimator that the system is under attack. State transition probabilities are derived in terms of system parameters, and the structure of the optimal policy is derived analytically. It turns out that the optimal policy amounts to checking whether the probability belief exceeds a threshold. Numerical results demonstrate significant performance gain under the proposed algorithm against competing algorithms.
11. Title: Dynamic Sensor Subset Selection for Centralized Tracking of an IID Process
Abstract: Motivated by the Internet-of-things and sensor networks for cyber-physical systems, the problem of dynamic sensor activation for the centralized tracking of an i.i.d. time-varying process is examined. The trade-off is between energy efficiency, which decreases with the number of active sensors, and fidelity, which increases with the number of active sensors. The problem of minimizing the time-averaged mean-squared error over infinite horizon is examined under the constraint of the mean number of active sensors. The proposed methods artfully combine Gibbs sampling and stochastic approximation for learning, in order to create a high performance, low-complexity, energy efficient tracking mechanisms with active sensor selection. Centralized tracking of i.i.d. process with known distribution as well as an unknown parametric distribution are considered. For an i.i.d. process with known distribution, convergence to the global optimal solution with high probability is proved. The main challenge of the i.i.d. case is that the process has a distribution parameterized by a known or unknown parameter which must be learned. One key theoretical result proves that the proposed algorithm for tracking an i.i.d. process with unknown parametric distribution converges to local optima, while requiring very limited computational resource. Numerical results show the efficacy of the proposed algorithms and also suggest that global optimality is in fact achieved in some cases.
12. Title: Minimization of Age-of-Information in Remote Sensing with Energy Harvesting
Abstract: In this paper, minimization of time-averaged age-of-information (AoI) in an energy harvesting (EH) source equipped remote sensing setting is considered. The EH source opportunistically samples one or multiple processes over discrete time instants, and sends the status updates to a sink node over a time-varying wireless link. At any discrete time instant, the EH node decides whether to probe the link quality using its stored energy, and further decides whether to sample a process and communicate the data based on the channel probe outcome. The trade-off is between the freshness of information available at the sink node and the available energy at the energy buffer of the source node. To this end, an infinite horizon Markov decision process theory is used to formulate the problem of minimization of time-averaged expected AoI for a single energy harvesting source node. The following two scenarios are considered: (i) single process with channel state information at transmitter (CSIT), (ii) multiple processes with CSIT. In each scenario, for probed channel state, the optimal source node sampling policy is shown to be a threshold policy involving the instantaneous age of the process(es), the available energy in the buffer and the instantaneous channel quality as the decision variables. Finally, numerical results are provided to demonstrate the policy structures and trade-offs.
13. Title: Adversarial Image Detection in Cyber-Physical Systems
Abstract: In this paper, detection of deception attack on deep neural network (DNN) based image classification in autonomous and cyber-physical systems is considered. Several studies have shown the vulnerability of DNN to malicious deception attack. In such attacks, some or all pixel values of an image are modified by an external attacker, so that the change is almost invisible to human eye but significant enough for a DNN-based classifier to misclassify it. This paper proposes a novel pre-processing technique that facilitates detection of such modified images under any DNN-based image classifier as well as attacker model. The proposed pre-processing algorithm involves a certain combination of principal component analysis (PCA)-based decomposition of the image, and random perturbation based detection to reduce computational complexity. Numerical experiments show that the proposed detection scheme outperforms a competing attack detection algorithm while achieving low false alarm rate and low computational complexity.
14. Title: Local Relay Selection in Presence of Dynamic Obstacles in Millimeter Wave D2D Communication
Abstract: Blockage due to obstacles in millimeter wave (mmWave) device to device (D2D) communication is a prominent problem due to their severe penetration losses. Potential user equipments (UEs) in vicinity of the source UE must be explored in order to select a new relay when the current link gets blocked. However, dynamic obstacles are not known in advance and thus may cause unpredictable fluctuations to D2D channel quality causing newly selected relay link also to be susceptible to blockage. This might cause frequent relay switching leading to call drops and high energy consumption. We have proposed the idea of reducing frequency in relay exploration and switching and thus average end-to-end delay (in seconds) at the expense of additional exploration time units (few milliseconds) during beam alignment. We seek to learn the uncertainty in D2D link qualities by modeling the problem as finite horizon partially observable Markov decision process (POMDP) framework locally at each UE. We have derived an optimal threshold policy which maps the state to set of actions. We then give a simplified and easy to implement stationary threshold policy which counts the number of successive acknowledgment successes/failures for making decisions of selecting or not selecting a given relay locally. Through extensive simulation, we validate our theoretical findings and demonstrate that our approach captures the tradeoff between average exploration time and average end-to-end (E2E) delay in presence of dynamic obstacles.
15. Title: Distributed Relay Selection in Presence of Dynamic Obstacles in Millimeter Wave D2D Communication
Abstract: Millimeter wave (mmWave) device to device (D2D) communication is highly susceptible to obstacles due to severe penetration losses and requires almost a line of sight (LOS) communication path. D2D channel condition is local to devices/user equipments (UEs) and hence is not directly visible to the base station (BS). Thus quality of the D2D channel needs to be propagated to BS by UEs which may incur some delay. Hence the solution provided by BS to UEs using this gathered channel information might become less useful to establish communication due to moving obstacles. These types of obstacles might not be known in advance and hence may cause unpredictable fluctuations to the D2D channel quality. Hence we seek to learn the D2D channels using the finite horizon partially observable Markov decision process (POMDP) framework to model the uncertainty in such kind of network environments with dynamic obstacles. The objective is to minimize delay when channel quality deteriorates, by making UEs choose locally the best possible decision between i) to continue on the current relay link on which communication is taking place or ii) to switch to another good relay by exploring other possible UEs in its locality. We derive an optimal threshold policy which tells the UE to take appropriate decision locally. Later, we give a simplified and easy to implement stationary threshold policy which counts the number of successive acknowledgement failures, based on which UE make appropriate decision locally. Through extensive simulation, we demonstrate that our approach outperforms recent algorithms.
16. Title: Optimal deception attack on networked vehicular cyber physical systems
Abstract: Herein, design of false data injection attack on a distributed cyber-physical system is considered. A stochastic process with linear dynamics and Gaussian noise is measured by multiple agent nodes, each equipped with multiple sensors. The agent nodes form a multi-hop network among themselves. Each agent node computes an estimate of the process by using its sensor observations and messages obtained from neighbouring nodes, via Kalman-consensus filtering. An external attacker, capable of arbitrarily manipulating the sensor observations of some or all agent nodes, injects errors into those sensor observations. The goal of the attacker is to steer the estimates at the agent nodes as close as possible to a pre-specified value, while respecting a constraint on the attack detection probability. To this end, a constrained optimization problem is formulated to find the optimal parameter values of a certain class of linear attacks. The parameters of linear attack are learnt on-line via a combination of stochastic approximation and online stochastic gradient descent. Numerical results demonstrate the efficacy of the attack.
17. Title: On Solving MDPs With Large State Space: Exploitation of Policy Structures and Spectral Properties
Abstract: In this paper, a point-to-point network transmission control problem is formulated as a Markov decision process (MDP). Classical dynamic programming techniques such as value iteration, policy iteration, and linear programming can be employed to solve the optimization problem, but they suffer from high-computational complexity in networks with large state space. To achieve complexity reduction, the structure of the optimal policy can be exploited and incorporated into standard algorithms. In addition, function approximation can also be applied, where the value function is approximated by the linear combination of some basis vectors in a lower dimensional subspace. The main challenge for function approximation lies in the absence of general guidelines for subspace construction. In this paper, a proper subspace for projection is first generated based on system information, and more general construction methods are proposed using tools from graph signal processing (GSP). Graph symmetrization methods are also used to tackle the directed nature of the probability transition graph so that the well-developed GSP theory for undirected graphs can be employed. The numerical results for a typical wireless system show that standard algorithms with structural information incorporated can achieve 50% complexity reduction without performance loss. The subspace generated from the system can achieve zero policy error with faster runtime, and the GSP approach can also provide a proper subspace for perfect reconstruction of the optimal policy. It is also shown that how the proposed method can be applied to other MDP problems.
18. Title: Two-Tier Cellular Networks for Throughput Maximization of Static and Mobile Users
Abstract: In small cell networks, the high mobility of users results in frequent handoff and thus severely restricts the data rate for mobile users (MUs). To alleviate this problem, we propose use of the heterogeneous two-tier network structure where static users (SUs) are served by both macro and micro base stations (BSs), whereas the mobile (i.e., moving) users are served only by the macro BSs having larger cells; the idea is to prevent frequent data outage for MUs due to handoff. We use the classical two-tier Poisson network model with different transmit powers, and assume the independent Poisson process of SUs and doubly stochastic Poisson process of MUs moving at a constant speed along infinite straight lines generated by a Poisson line process. Using tools from stochastic geometry, we calculate the average downlink data rate of the typical static and mobile (i.e., moving) users, and the latter accounted for handoff outage periods. We consider also the average throughput of these two types of users defined as their average data rates divided by the mean total number of users co-served by the same base station. We find that if the density of a homogeneous network and/or the speed of MUs is high, it is advantageous to let the MUs connect only to some optimal fraction of BSs (i.e., an optimal random subset of BSs) to reduce the frequency of handoffs during which the connection is not assured. If a heterogeneous structure of the network is allowed, one can further jointly optimize the mean throughput of MUs and SUs. This joint optimization is done by appropriately tuning the powers of micro and macro BSs subject to some aggregate power constraint ensuring unchanged mean data rates of SUs via the network equivalence property.
19. Title: Security Against False Data-Injection Attack in Cyber-Physical Systems
Abstract: In this paper, secure, remote estimation of a linear Gaussian process via observations at multiple sensors is considered. Such a framework is relevant to many cyber-physical systems and Internet-of-things applications. Sensors make sequential measurements that are shared with a fusion center; the fusion center applies a filtering algorithm to make its estimates. The challenge is the presence of a few unknown malicious sensors which can inject anomalous observations to skew the estimates at the fusion center. The set of malicious sensors may be time varying. The problems of malicious sensor detection and secure estimation are considered. First, an algorithm for secure estimation is proposed. The proposed estimation scheme uses a novel filtering and learning algorithm, where an optimal filter is learned over time by using the sensor observations in order to filter out malicious sensor observations while retaining other sensor measurements. Next, a novel detector to detect injection attacks on an unknown sensor subset is developed. Numerical results demonstrate up to 3-dB gain in the mean-squared error and up to $\text{75} \%$ higher attack detection probability under a small false alarm rate constraint, against a competing algorithm that requires additional side information.
20. Title: Attack detection and secure estimation under false data injection attack in cyber-physical systems
Abstract: In this paper, secure, remote estimation of a linear time-varying Gaussian process via observations at multiple sensors is considered. Such a framework is relevant to many cyberphysical systems and internet-of-things applications. Sensors make sequential measurements that are shared with a fusion center; the fusion center applies a form of optimal filtering to make its estimates. The challenge is the presence of malicious sensors which can inject anomalous observations to skew the estimates at the fusion center. The set of malicious sensors may be time-varying. The problems of malicious sensor detection and secure estimation are considered. First, a novel detector to detect injection attack on an unknown sensor subset is developed. Next, an algorithm for secure estimation is proposed. The proposed estimation scheme uses a novel filtering and learning algorithm, where an optimal filter is learnt over time by using the sensor observations in order to filter out malicious sensor observations while retaining other sensor measurements. Numerical results demonstrate the efficacy of the proposed algorithms.
