Reviewer papers:
1. Title: Deterministic particle flows for constraining stochastic nonlinear systems
Abstract: Dimitra Maoutsa 1, 2, ∗ and Manfred Opper3, 4, † Department of Theoretical Computer Science, Technical University of Berlin, Marchstraße 23, 10587 Berlin, Germany Institute of Mathematics, University of Potsdam, Karl-Liebknecht-Str. 24/25, 14476 Potsdam, Germany Department of Theoretical Computer Science, Technical University of Berlin, Marchstraße 23, 10587 Berlin, Germany Centre for Systems Modelling and Quantitative Biomedicine, University of Birmingham, United Kingdom (Dated: December 13, 2021)
2. Title: Deterministic particle flows for constraining SDEs
Abstract: Devising optimal interventions for diffusive systems often requires the solution of the Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman (HJB) equation, a nonlinear backward partial differential equation (PDE), that is, in general, nontrivial to solve. Existing control methods either tackle the HJB directly with grid-based PDE solvers, or resort to iterative stochastic path sampling to obtain the necessary controls. Here, we present a framework that interpolates between these two approaches. By reformulating the optimal interventions in terms of logarithmic gradients ( scores ) of two forward probability flows, and by employing deterministic particle methods for solving Fokker-Planck equations, we introduce a novel fully deterministic framework that computes the required optimal interventions in one shot.
3. Title: Interacting Particle Solutions of Fokker–Planck Equations Through Gradient–Log–Density Estimation
Abstract: Fokker–Planck equations are extensively employed in various scientific fields as they characterise the behaviour of stochastic systems at the level of probability density functions. Although broadly used, they allow for analytical treatment only in limited settings, and often it is inevitable to resort to numerical solutions. Here, we develop a computational approach for simulating the time evolution of Fokker–Planck solutions in terms of a mean field limit of an interacting particle system. The interactions between particles are determined by the gradient of the logarithm of the particle density, approximated here by a novel statistical estimator. The performance of our method shows promising results, with more accurate and less fluctuating statistics compared to direct stochastic simulations of comparable particle number. Taken together, our framework allows for effortless and reliable particle-based simulations of Fokker–Planck equations in low and moderate dimensions. The proposed gradient–log–density estimator is also of independent interest, for example, in the context of optimal control.
4. Title: Inferring Network Connectivity from Event Timing Patterns.
Abstract: Reconstructing network connectivity from the collective dynamics of a system typically requires access to its complete continuous-time evolution, although these are often experimentally inaccessible. Here we propose a theory for revealing physical connectivity of networked systems only from the event time series their intrinsic collective dynamics generate. Representing the patterns of event timings in an event space spanned by interevent and cross-event intervals, we reveal which other units directly influence the interevent times of any given unit. For illustration, we linearize an event-space mapping constructed from the spiking patterns in model neural circuits to reveal the presence or absence of synapses between any pair of neurons, as well as whether the coupling acts in an inhibiting or activating (excitatory) manner. The proposed model-independent reconstruction theory is scalable to larger networks and may thus play an important role in the reconstruction of networks from biology to social science and engineering.
5. Title: N C ] 2 9 M ar 2 01 8 Inferring network connectivity from event timing patterns
Abstract: Jose Casadiego, Dimitra Maoutsa, Marc Timme Chair for Network Dynamics, Institute of Theoretical Physics and Center for Advancing Electronics Dresden (cfaed), Technical University of Dresden, 01062 Dresden, Germany Network Dynamics, Max Planck Institute for Dynamics and Self-Organization (MPIDS), 37077 Göttingen, Germany Bernstein Center for Computational Neuroscience (BCCN), 37077 Göttingen, Germany Advanced Study Group, Max Planck Institute for the Physics of Complex Systems, 01069 Dresden, Germany
