Reviewer papers:
1. Title: AUTOLEX: An Automatic Framework for Linguistic Exploration
Abstract: Each language has its own complex systems of word, phrase, and sentence construction, the guiding principles of which are often summarized in grammar descriptions for the consumption of linguists or language learners. However, manual creation of such descriptions is a fraught process, as creating descriptions which describe the language in “its own terms” without bias or error requires both a deep understanding of the language at hand and linguistics as a whole. We propose an automatic framework AUTOLEX that aims to ease linguists’ discovery and extraction of concise descriptions of linguistic phenomena. Specifically, we apply this framework to extract descriptions for three phenomena: morphological agreement, case marking, and word order, across several languages. We evaluate the descriptions with the help of language experts and propose a method for automated evaluation when human evaluation is infeasible.1
2. Title: Menstrual hygiene: an important prognosticator of excessive vaginal bleeding in the high focused states of India
Abstract: Background: There is increasing evidence of challenges that girls and women face in managing menstruation and vaginal bleeding. In many societies, these are handled behind the scenes as cultural taboos. Objectives: The study aims to address the effects of menstrual hygiene on excessive vaginal bleeding during and after delivery. Methods: The study used data from the fourth round of the National Family Health Survey. The study included 146,121 women aged 15-24 years from high focused states of India. Chi-Square analysis was used to examine the significance of menstrual hygiene on excessive vaginal bleeding during and after delivery. In addition, binary logistic regression was used for the assessment of the adjusted effects. Results: The prevalence of excessive vaginal bleeding during and after delivery ranged from 4.3 percent to 12.8 percent and 2.6 percent to 8.2 percent, respectively. Women who use hygienic method of protection to prevent blood stains during menstrual period were at lower risk of suffering from excessive vaginal bleeding during (OR = 0.80; 95% CI = [0.77, 0.84]) and after delivery (OR = 0.91; 95% CI = [0.86, 0.97]). Women who had terminated pregnancy, having higher BMI and lower level of education were also at higher risk. Conclusion: The study portrays evidence of a strong association between menstrual hygiene and excessive vaginal bleeding during and after delivery. Therefore, attention in research, practice and policy, including improved education, training and communication, is necessary to break the silence around girls and women’s regarding menstrual hygiene
3. Title: Evaluating the Morphosyntactic Well-formedness of Generated Texts
Abstract: Text generation systems are ubiquitous in natural language processing applications. However, evaluation of these systems remains a challenge, especially in multilingual settings. In this paper, we propose L’AMBRE – a metric to evaluate the morphosyntactic well-formedness of text using its dependency parse and morphosyntactic rules of the language. We present a way to automatically extract various rules governing morphosyntax directly from dependency treebanks. To tackle the noisy outputs from text generation systems, we propose a simple methodology to train robust parsers. We show the effectiveness of our metric on the task of machine translation through a diachronic study of systems translating into morphologically-rich languages.
4. Title: Organ donation in India and Nurses as a change to lead in Organ Donation: Scooping Review of Organ Donation
Abstract: Organ donation is the donation of biological tissue or an organ of the human body from a living or dead person to a living recipient in need of a transplantation. Organ transplantation has made rapid strides over the last 6 decades and established its status from an experimental procedure to a well-established treatment modality. The great part of organ donation is most people can be organ donors. Nurses as being the largest part of any health care fleet can play a pivotal role in the dissemination of the right information, and nurse’s knowledge and commitment towards spreading awareness and motivating people pledging for organ donation are extremely important for the success of organ donation program.
5. Title: Modified laser-assisted lip repositioning surgery to treat gummy smile
Abstract: Excessive gingival display (EGD), known as “gummy smile,” is a major esthetic hurdle in today's population. The condition occurs due to various etiologies such as skeletal, dentoalveolar, or soft-tissue origin. The treatment modalities range from orthognathic surgery to periodontal plastic procedures. Lip-repositioning surgery (LRS) is a better alternative for the conventional orthognathic surgery and laser-assisted LRS can be a reliable and a less invasive alternative to conventional (scalpel) LRS. The present case describes the successful treatment of a young female exhibiting an EGD caused by hypermobility of the upper lip and was treated with a modified laser-assisted LRS coupled with gingival recontouring. In a study published earlier, a mild recurrence was observed and hence, to overcome the recurrence, a modified technique, by excising a strip of mucosa with an additional 2 mm of tissue along with the muscular attachment rather than scraping, was attempted.
6. Title: Cytogenetic Consequences of Food Industry Workers Occupationally Exposed to Cooking Oil Fumes (COFs).
Abstract: BACKGROUND
Cooking oil fumes (COFs) with smoking habits is a substantial risk that aggravates genetic modifications. The current study was to estimate the biological markers of genetic toxicity counting Micronucleus changes (MN), Chromosome Aberrations (CA) and DNA modifications among COFs exposures and control subjects inherent from South India.


MATERIALS AND METHODS
Present analysis comprised 212 COFs with tobacco users and equivalent number of control subjects.


RESULTS
High frequency of CA (Chromatid type: and chromosome type) were identified in group II experimental subjects also high amount of MN and DNA damage frequency were significantly (p < 0.05) in both subjects (experimental smokers and non-smokers). Present analysis was observed absence of consciousness among the COFs exposures about the destructive level of health effects of tobacco habits in working environment.


CONCLUSION
COFs exposed workers with tobacco induce the significant alteration in chromosomal level. Furthermore, a high level of rate of genetic diseases (spontaneous abortion) were identified in the experimental subjects. This finding will be helpful for preventive measures of COFs exposed workers and supportive for further molecular analysis.
7. Title: Tweet Retrieval and Analysing the Trends
Abstract: We can’t disregard the importance of Social Media in Today’s Technology Era. Internet is almost in every hand. People uses various Social Media platforms to express themselves and their thinking about various topics such as Politics, Entertainment, Sports, etc. In the Data Science industry, trend analysis can be used for several purposes like marketing or product analysis. Twitter data has been used to analyze political polarization and the spread of protest movements. Twitter is one of the most popular social media platform that allows the users to spread and share information. Twitter publishes the list of recent or latest topics named as “Trending Topics” which shows all the happenings in the world and what are the people’s opinions about those topics. This Trend Analyzer will work on a given set of tweets and generates a graph based on the tweets and showsthe comparative popularity of the used hashtags. This Analyzer will examine a set of tweets using Python and text-processing techniques
8. Title: When is Wall a Pared and when a Muro?: Extracting Rules Governing Lexical Selection
Abstract: Learning fine-grained distinctions between vocabulary items is a key challenge in learning a new language. For example, the noun “wall” has different lexical manifestations in Spanish – “pared” refers to an indoor wall while “muro” refers to an outside wall. However, this variety of lexical distinction may not be obvious to non-native learners unless the distinction is explained in such a way. In this work, we present a method for automatically identifying fine-grained lexical distinctions, and extracting rules explaining these distinctions in a human- and machine-readable format. We confirm the quality of these extracted rules in a language learning setup for two languages, Spanish and Greek, where we use the rules to teach non-native speakers when to translate a given ambiguous word into its different possible translations.
9. Title: Do Context-Aware Translation Models Pay the Right Attention?
Abstract: Context-aware machine translation models are designed to leverage contextual information, but often fail to do so. As a result, they inaccurately disambiguate pronouns and polysemous words that require context for resolution. In this paper, we ask several questions: What contexts do human translators use to resolve ambiguous words? Are models paying large amounts of attention to the same context? What if we explicitly train them to do so? To answer these questions, we introduce SCAT (Supporting Context for Ambiguous Translations), a new English-French dataset comprising supporting context words for 14K translations that professional translators found useful for pronoun disambiguation. Using SCAT, we perform an in-depth analysis of the context used to disambiguate, examining positional and lexical characteristics of the supporting words. Furthermore, we measure the degree of alignment between the model’s attention scores and the supporting context from SCAT, and apply a guided attention strategy to encourage agreement between the two.
10. Title: Exploring Neural Architectures And Techniques For Typologically Diverse Morphological Inflection
Abstract: Morphological inflection in low resource languages is critical to augment existing corpora in Low Resource Languages, which can help develop several applications in these languages with very good social impact. We describe our attention-based encoder-decoder approach that we implement using LSTMs and Transformers as the base units. We also describe the ancillary techniques that we experimented with, such as hallucination, language vector injection, sparsemax loss and adversarial language network alongside our approach to select the related language(s) for training. We present the results we generated on the constrained as well as unconstrained SIGMORPHON 2020 dataset (CITATION). One of the primary goals of our paper was to study the contribution varied components described above towards the performance of our system and perform an analysis on the same.
11. Title: Gesture controlled environment using sixth sense technology and its implementation in IoT
Abstract: This paper proposes an idea of building an interface to merge the existing technologies like Image processing, Internet of Things, Sixth sense, etc. at one place to reduce the hardware restrictions imposed on a user and improve the responsiveness of the system. The wearable device comprises of a camera, a projector, and its own gesture-controlled environment having smart tools based on trending techniques like gesture recognition, color marker detection, and speech recognition. The interface is trained using machine learning. It is also interfaced with an IoT based lab to access the lab controls remotely, enhance the security, and to connect devices present in the lab.
12. Title: Reducing Confusion in Active Learning for Part-Of-Speech Tagging
Abstract: Active learning (AL) uses a data selection algorithm to select useful training samples to minimize annotation cost. This is now an essential tool for building low-resource syntactic analyzers such as part-of-speech (POS) taggers. Existing AL heuristics are generally designed on the principle of selecting uncertain yet representative training instances, where annotating these instances may reduce a large number of errors. However, in an empirical study across six typologically diverse languages (German, Swedish, Galician, North Sami, Persian, and Ukrainian), we found the surprising result that even in an oracle scenario where we know the true uncertainty of predictions, these current heuristics are far from optimal. Based on this analysis, we pose the problem of AL as selecting instances that maximally reduce the confusion between particular pairs of output tags. Extensive experimentation on the aforementioned languages shows that our proposed AL strategy outperforms other AL strategies by a significant margin. We also present auxiliary results demonstrating the importance of proper calibration of models, which we ensure through cross-view training, and analysis demonstrating how our proposed strategy selects examples that more closely follow the oracle data distribution. The code is publicly released here.1
13. Title: Automatic Extraction of Rules Governing Morphological Agreement
Abstract: Creating a descriptive grammar of a language is an indispensable step for language documentation and preservation. However, at the same time it is a tedious, time-consuming task. In this paper, we take steps towards automating this process by devising an automated framework for extracting a first-pass grammatical specification from raw text in a concise, human- and machine-readable format. We focus on extracting rules describing agreement, a morphosyntactic phenomenon at the core of the grammars of many of the world's languages. We apply our framework to all languages included in the Universal Dependencies project, with promising results. Using cross-lingual transfer, even with no expert annotations in the language of interest, our framework extracts a grammatical specification which is nearly equivalent to those created with large amounts of gold-standard annotated data. We confirm this finding with human expert evaluations of the rules that our framework produces, which have an average accuracy of 78%. We release an interface demonstrating the extracted rules at this https URL.
14. Title: Treatment of Oral Leukoplakia Using Different SurgicalTechniques with Diode Laser
Abstract: Oral premalignant lesions such as leukoplakia and erythroplakia remain a diagnostic and management challenge having a potential for malignant transformation. The management includes non-surgical and surgical therapies. The gold standard being laser excision. Lasers by far have been a well-established treatment modality for oral premalignant lesions and has potential advantages over surgical excision using scalpels. Various studies have shown the application of different lasers for the management of oral premalignant lesions showing effective outcomes. In the present study, the authors have described different surgical techniques to treat oral leukoplakia and have reported effective results with no recurrence.
15. Title: A Summary of the First Workshop on Language Technology for Language Documentation and Revitalization
Abstract: Despite recent advances in natural language processing and other language technology, the application of such technology to language documentation and conservation has been limited. In August 2019, a workshop was held at Carnegie Mellon University in Pittsburgh, PA, USA to attempt to bring together language community members, documentary linguists, and technologists to discuss how to bridge this gap and create prototypes of novel and practical language revitalization technologies. The workshop focused on developing technologies to aid language documentation and revitalization in four areas: 1) spoken language (speech transcription, phone to orthography decoding, text-to-speech and text-speech forced alignment), 2) dictionary extraction and management, 3) search tools for corpora, and 4) social media (language learning bots and social media analysis). This paper reports the results of this workshop, including issues discussed, and various conceived and implemented technologies for nine languages: Arapaho, Cayuga, Inuktitut, Irish Gaelic, Kidaw’ida, Kwak’wala, Ojibwe, San Juan Quiahije Chatino, and Seneca.
16. Title: DICT-MLM: Improved Multilingual Pre-Training using Bilingual Dictionaries
Abstract: Pre-trained multilingual language models such as mBERT have shown immense gains for several natural language processing (NLP) tasks, especially in the zero-shot cross-lingual setting. Most, if not all, of these pre-trained models rely on the masked-language modeling (MLM) objective as the key language learning objective. The principle behind these approaches is that predicting the masked words with the help of the surrounding text helps learn potent contextualized representations. Despite the strong representation learning capability enabled by MLM, we demonstrate an inherent limitation of MLM for multilingual representation learning. In particular, by requiring the model to predict the language-specific token, the MLM objective disincentivizes learning a language-agnostic representation -- which is a key goal of multilingual pre-training. Therefore to encourage better cross-lingual representation learning we propose the DICT-MLM method. DICT-MLM works by incentivizing the model to be able to predict not just the original masked word, but potentially any of its cross-lingual synonyms as well. Our empirical analysis on multiple downstream tasks spanning 30+ languages, demonstrates the efficacy of the proposed approach and its ability to learn better multilingual representations.
17. Title: SIGTYP 2020 Shared Task: Prediction of Typological Features
Abstract: Typological knowledge bases (KBs) such as WALS (Dryer and Haspelmath, 2013) contain information about linguistic properties of the world’s languages. They have been shown to be useful for downstream applications, including cross-lingual transfer learning and linguistic probing. A major drawback hampering broader adoption of typological KBs is that they are sparsely populated, in the sense that most languages only have annotations for some features, and skewed, in that few features have wide coverage. As typological features often correlate with one another, it is possible to predict them and thus automatically populate typological KBs, which is also the focus of this shared task. Overall, the task attracted 8 submissions from 5 teams, out of which the most successful methods make use of such feature correlations. However, our error analysis reveals that even the strongest submitted systems struggle with predicting feature values for languages where few features are known.
18. Title: Closed Flap Osseous Crown Lengthening Procedure
Abstract: Osseous crown-lengthening is often needed to enhance the appearance of a patient’s smile, prevent the violation of biologic width, and/or provide sufficient tooth structure for the placement of final restorations. The present technique for osseous crown lengthening typically involves flap surgery, a procedure that frequently is associated with postoperative complications that can interfere with the aesthetic outcome, such as infection, bleeding, and change in tissue position during the healing process. The erbium laser enables the clinician to offer the patient a minimally invasive alternative to osseous crown lengthening negating the adverse effects associated with conventional treatment. Other advantages of using the laser for osseous crown lengthening includes: hemostasis, improved visualization, fewer postoperative complications and recession.
19. Title: A Little Annotation does a Lot of Good: A Study in Bootstrapping Low-resource Named Entity Recognizers
Abstract: Most state-of-the-art models for named entity recognition (NER) rely on the availability of large amounts of labeled data, making them challenging to extend to new, lower-resourced languages. However, there are now many proposed solutions to this problem involving either cross-lingual transfer learning, which learns from other highly resourced languages, or active learning, which efficiently selects effective training data based on model predictions. In this paper, we ask the question: given this recent progress, and some amount of human annotation, what is the most effective method for efficiently creating high-quality entity recognizers in under-resourced languages? Based on extensive experimentation using both simulated and real human annotation, we settle on a recipe of starting with a cross-lingual transferred model, then performing targeted annotation of only uncertain entity spans in the target language, minimizing annotator effort. Results demonstrate that cross-lingual transfer is a powerful tool when very little data can be annotated, but an entity-targeted annotation strategy can achieve competitive accuracy quickly, with just one-tenth of training data.
20. Title: The ARIEL-CMU Systems for LoReHLT18
Abstract: This paper describes the ARIEL-CMU submissions to the Low Resource Human Language Technologies (LoReHLT) 2018 evaluations for the tasks Machine Translation (MT), Entity Discovery and Linking (EDL), and detection of Situation Frames in Text and Speech (SF Text and Speech).
