Reviewer papers:
1. Title: Decision-Dependent Risk Minimization in Geometrically Decaying Dynamic Environments
Abstract: This paper studies the problem of expected loss minimization given a data distribution that is dependent on the decision-maker’s action and evolves dynamically in time according to a geometric decay process. Novel algorithms for both the information setting in which the decision-maker has a ﬁrst or- der gradient oracle and the setting in which they have simply a loss function oracle are are introduced. The algorithms operate on the same underlying principle: the decision-maker repeatedly deploys a ﬁxed decision repeatedly over the length of an epoch, thereby allowing the dynamically changing environment to sufﬁciently mix before updating the decision. The iteration complexity in each of the settings is shown to match existing rates for ﬁrst and zero order stochastic gradient meth- ods up to logarithmic factors. The algorithms are evaluated on a “semi-synthetic” example using real world data from the SFpark dynamic pricing pilot study; it is shown that the announced prices result in an improvement for the institution’s objective (target occupancy), while achieving an overall re-duction in parking rates.
2. Title: Multiplayer Performative Prediction: Learning in Decision-Dependent Games
Abstract: Learning problems commonly exhibit an interesting feedback mechanism wherein the population data reacts to competing decision makers’ actions. This paper formulates a new game theoretic framework for this phenomenon, called multi-player performative prediction . We focus on two distinct solution concepts, namely ( i ) performatively stable equilibria and ( ii ) Nash equilibria of the game. The latter equilibria are arguably more informative, but can be found eﬃciently only when the game is monotone. We show that under mild assumptions, the performatively stable equilibria can be found eﬃciently by a variety of algorithms, including repeated retraining and the repeated (stochastic) gradient method. We then establish transparent suﬃcient conditions for strong monotonicity of the game and use them to develop algorithms for ﬁnding Nash equilibria. We investigate derivative free methods and adaptive gradient algorithms wherein each player alternates between learning a parametric description of their distribution and gradient steps on the empirical risk. Synthetic and semi-synthetic numerical experiments illustrate the results. have and correlations equilibrium the results 10 nominal
3. Title: Stackelberg MADDPG: Learning Emergent Behaviors via Information Asymmetry in Competitive Games
Abstract: Using competitive multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) methods to solve physically grounded problems, such as robust control and interactive manipulation tasks, has become more popular in the robotics community. However, the asymmetric nature of these tasks makes the generation of sophisticated policies challenging. Indeed, the asymmetry in the environment may implicitly or explicitly provide an advantage to a subset of agents which could, in turn, lead to a low quality equilibrium. This paper proposes a novel game-theoretic MARL algorithm, Stackelberg Multi-Agent Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient (ST-MADDPG), which formulates a two-player MARL problem as a Stackelberg game with one player as the ‘leader’ and the other as the ‘follower’ in a hierarchical interaction structure wherein the leader has an information advantage: the leader in ST-MADDPG updates using its total policy gradient, meaning it differentiates through the local best response of the follower. In a simple competitive robotics environment, we show that the leader learns a better policy by exploiting this information advantage and is able to either dominate the game or alleviate the native disadvantage from the game environment. In two practical robotic problems, ST-MADDPG allows the leader to learn more sophisticated and complex strategies that work well even against an unseen strong opponent.
4. Title: Improved rates for derivative free play in convex games
Abstract: The influential work of Bravo et al. (2018) shows that derivative free play in strongly monotone games has complexity O(d/ε), where ε is the target accuracy on the expected squared distance to the solution. This note shows that the efficiency estimate is actually O(d/ε), which reduces to the known efficiency guarantee for the method in unconstrained optimization. The argument we present is elementary, simply interpreting the method as stochastic gradient play on a slightly perturbed strongly monotone game.
5. Title: Approximate Regions of Attraction in Learning with Decision-Dependent Distributions
Abstract: As data-driven methods are deployed in real-world settings, the processes that generate the observed data will often react to the decisions of the learner. For example, a data source may have some incentive for the algorithm to provide a particular label (e.g. approve a bank loan), and manipulate their features accordingly. Work in strategic classification and decisiondependent distributions seeks to characterize the closed-loop behavior of deploying learning algorithms by explicitly considering the effect of the classifier on the underlying data distribution. More recently, works in performative prediction seek to classify the closed-loop behavior by considering general properties of the mapping from classifier to data distribution, rather than an explicit form. Building on this notion, we analyze repeated risk minimization as the perturbed trajectories of the gradient flows of performative risk minimization. We consider the case where there may be multiple local minimizers of performative risk, motivated by situations where the initial conditions may have significant impact on the long-term behavior of the system. We provide sufficient conditions to characterize the region of attraction for the various equilibria in this settings. Additionally, we introduce the notion of performative alignment, which provides a geometric condition on the convergence of repeated risk minimization to performative
6. Title: Minimax Optimization with Smooth Algorithmic Adversaries
Abstract: This paper considers minimax optimization minx maxy f(x, y) in the challenging setting where f can be both nonconvex in x and nonconcave in y. Though such optimization problems arise in many machine learning paradigms including training generative adversarial networks (GANs) and adversarially robust models, many fundamental issues remain in theory, such as the absence of efficiently computable optimality notions, and cyclic or diverging behavior of existing algorithms. Our framework sprouts from the practical consideration that under a computational budget, the max-player can not fully maximize f(x, ·) since nonconcave maximization is NP-hard in general. So, we propose a new algorithm for the min-player to play against smooth algorithms deployed by the adversary (i.e., the max-player) instead of against full maximization. Our algorithm is guaranteed to make monotonic progress (thus having no limit cycles), and to find an appropriate “stationary point” in a polynomial number of iterations. Our framework covers practical settings where the smooth algorithms deployed by the adversary are multi-step stochastic gradient ascent, and its accelerated version. We further provide complementing experiments that confirm our theoretical findings and demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed approach in practice.
7. Title: Global Convergence to Local Minmax Equilibrium in Classes of Nonconvex Zero-Sum Games
Abstract: We study gradient descent-ascent learning dynamics with timescale separation (τ -GDA) in unconstrained continuous action zero-sum games where the minimizing player faces a nonconvex optimization problem and the maximizing player optimizes a Polyak-Łojasiewicz (PŁ) or strongly-concave (SC) objective. In contrast to past work on gradient-based learning in nonconvex-PŁ/SC zero-sum games, we assess convergence in relation to natural game-theoretic equilibria instead of only notions of stationarity. In pursuit of this goal, we prove that the only locally stable points of the τ -GDA continuous-time limiting system correspond to strict local minmax equilibria in each class of games. For these classes of games, we exploit timescale separation to construct a potential function that when combined with the stability characterization and an asymptotic saddle avoidance result gives a global asymptotic almost-sure convergence guarantee for the discrete-time gradient descent-ascent update to a set of the strict local minmax equilibrium. Moreover, we provide convergence rates for the gradient descent-ascent dynamics with timescale separation to approximate stationary points.
8. Title: Improved Rates for Derivative Free Gradient Play in Strongly Monotone Games
Abstract: The inﬂuential work of Bravo et al. (2018) shows that derivative free gradient play in strongly monotone games has complexity O ( d 2 /ε 3 ), where ε is the target accuracy on the expected squared distance to the solution. This paper shows that the eﬃciency estimate is actually O ( d 2 /ε 2 ), which reduces to the known eﬃciency guarantee for the method in unconstrained optimization. The argument we present simply interprets the method as stochastic gradient play on a slightly perturbed strongly monotone game to achieve the improved rate.
9. Title: Which Echo Chamber? Regions of Attraction in Learning with Decision-Dependent Distributions
Abstract: As data-driven methods are deployed in real-world settings, the processes that generate the observed data will often react to the decisions of the learner. For example, a data source may have some incentive for the algorithm to provide a particular label (e.g. approve a bank loan), and manipulate their features accordingly. Work in strategic classification and decision-dependent distributions seeks to characterize the closed-loop behavior of deploying learning algorithms by explicitly considering the effect of the classifier on the underlying data distribution. More recently, works in performative prediction seek to classify the closed-loop behavior by considering general properties of the mapping from classifier to data distribution, rather than an explicit form. Building on this notion, we analyze repeated risk minimization as the perturbed trajectories of the gradient flows of performative risk minimization. We consider the case where there may be multiple local minimizers of performative risk, motivated by real world situations where the initial conditions may have significant impact on the long-term behavior of the system. As a motivating example, we consider a company whose current employee demographics affect the applicant pool they interview: the initial demographics of the company can affect the long-term hiring policies of the company. We provide sufficient conditions to characterize the region of attraction for the various equilibria in this settings. Additionally, we introduce the notion of performative alignment, which provides a geometric condition on the convergence of repeated risk minimization to performative risk minimizers.
10. Title: Zeroth-Order Methods for Convex-Concave Minmax Problems: Applications to Decision-Dependent Risk Minimization
Abstract: Min-max optimization is emerging as a key framework for analyzing problems of robustness to strategically and adversarially generated data. We propose a random reshuffling-based gradient free Optimistic Gradient Descent-Ascent algorithm for solving convex-concave min-max problems with finite sum structure. We prove that the algorithm enjoys the same convergence rate as that of zeroth-order algorithms for convex minimization problems. We further specialize the algorithm to solve distributionally robust, decision-dependent learning problems, where gradient information is not readily available. Through illustrative simulations, we observe that our proposed approach learns models that are simultaneously robust against adversarial distribution shifts and strategic decisions from the data sources, and outperforms existing methods from the strategic classification literature.
11. Title: Online Learning in Periodic Zero-Sum Games
Abstract: A seminal result in game theory is von Neumann’s minmax theorem, which states that zero-sum games admit an essentially unique equilibrium solution. Classical learning results build on this theorem to show that online no-regret dynamics converge to an equilibrium in a time-average sense in zero-sum games. In the past several years, a key research direction has focused on characterizing the day-to-day behavior of such dynamics. General results in this direction show that broad classes of online learning dynamics are cyclic, and formally Poincaré recurrent, in zero-sum games. We analyze the robustness of these online learning behaviors in the case of periodic zero-sum games with a time-invariant equilibrium. This model generalizes the usual repeated game formulation while also being a realistic and natural model of a repeated competition between players that depends on exogenous environmental variations such as time-of-day effects, week-to-week trends, and seasonality. Interestingly, time-average convergence may fail even in the simplest such settings, in spite of the equilibrium being fixed. In contrast, using novel analysis methods, we show that Poincaré recurrence provably generalizes despite the complex, non-autonomous nature of these dynamical systems.
12. Title: Stackelberg Actor-Critic: Game-Theoretic Reinforcement Learning Algorithms
Abstract: The hierarchical interaction between the actor and critic in actor-critic based reinforcement learning algorithms naturally lends itself to a game-theoretic interpretation. We adopt this viewpoint and model the actor and critic interaction as a two-player general-sum game with a leader-follower structure known as a Stackelberg game. Given this abstraction, we propose a meta-framework for Stackelberg actor-critic algorithms where the leader player follows the total derivative of its objective instead of the usual individual gradient. From a theoretical standpoint, we develop a policy gradient theorem for the refined update and provide a local convergence guarantee for the Stackelberg actor-critic algorithms to a local Stackelberg equilibrium. From an empirical standpoint, we demonstrate via simple examples that the learning dynamics we study mitigate cycling and accelerate convergence compared to the usual gradient dynamics given cost structures induced by actor-critic formulations. Finally, experiments on OpenAI gym environments show that Stackelberg actor-critic algorithms always perform at least as well and often significantly outperform the standard actor-critic algorithm counterparts.
13. Title: Uncertainty in Multicommodity Routing Networks: When Does It Help?
Abstract: We study the equilibrium behavior in a multicommodity selfish routing game with uncertain users, where each user over- or underestimates their congestion costs by a multiplicative factor. Surprisingly, we find that uncertainties in different directions have qualitatively distinct impacts on equilibria. Namely, contrary to the usual notion that uncertainty increases inefficiencies, network congestion decreases when users overestimate their costs. On the other hand, underestimation of costs leads to increased congestion. We apply these results to urban transportation networks, where drivers have different estimates about the cost of congestion. In light of the dynamic pricing policies aimed at tackling congestion, our results indicate that users' perception of these prices can significantly impact the policy's efficacy, and “caution in the face of uncertainty” leads to favorable network conditions.
14. Title: Implicit Learning Dynamics in Stackelberg Games: Equilibria Characterization, Convergence Analysis, and Empirical Study
Abstract: Contemporary work on learning in continuous games has commonly overlooked the hierarchical decision-making structure present in machine learning problems formulated as games, instead treating them as simultaneous play games and adopting the Nash equilibrium solution concept. We deviate from this paradigm and provide a comprehensive study of learning in Stackelberg games. This work provides insights into the optimization landscape of zero-sum games by establishing connections between Nash and Stackelberg equilibria along with the limit points of simultaneous gradient descent. We derive novel gradient-based learning dynamics emulating the natural structure of a Stackelberg game using the implicit function theorem and provide convergence analysis for deterministic and stochastic updates for zero-sum and general-sum games. Notably, in zero-sum games using deterministic updates, we show the only critical points the dynamics converge to are Stackelberg equilibria and provide a local convergence rate. Empirically, our learning dynamics mitigate rotational behavior and exhibit benefits for training generative adversarial networks compared to simultaneous gradient descent.
15. Title: Constrained Upper Confidence Reinforcement Learning
Abstract: Constrained Markov Decision Processes are a class of stochastic decision problems in which the decision maker must select a policy that satisfies auxiliary cost constraints. This paper extends upper confidence reinforcement learning for settings in which the reward function and the constraints, described by cost functions, are unknown a priori but the transition kernel is known. Such a setting is well-motivated by a number of applications including exploration of unknown, potentially unsafe, environments. We present an algorithm C-UCRL and show that it achieves sub-linear regret ($ O(T^{\frac{3}{4}}\sqrt{\log(T/\delta)})$) with respect to the reward while satisfying the constraints even while learning with probability $1-\delta$. Illustrative examples are provided.
16. Title: Evolutionary Game Theory Squared: Evolving Agents in Evolving Games
Abstract: The predominant paradigm in evolutionary game theory and more generally online learning in games is based on a clear distinction between a population of dynamic agents that interact given a fixed, static game. In this paper, we move away from the artificial divide between dynamic agents and static games, to introduce and analyze a large class of competitive settings where both agents and the games they play evolve strategically over time. We focus on arguably the most archetypal game-theoretic setting—zero-sum (as well as network generalizations)—and the most studied evolutionary learning dynamic—replicator, the continuous-time analogue of multiplicative weights. Populations of agents compete against each other in a zero-sum competition that itself evolves adversarially to the current population mixture. Remarkably, despite the chaotic coevolution of agents and games, we prove that the system exhibits a number of regularities. First, the system has conservation laws of an information-theoretic flavor that couple the behavior of all agents and games. Secondly, the system is Poincaré recurrent, with effectively all possible initializations of agents and games lying on recurrent orbits that come arbitrarily close to their initial conditions infinitely often. Thirdly, the time-average agent behavior and utility converge to the Nash equilibrium values of the time-average game. Finally, we provide a polynomial time algorithm to efficiently predict this time-average behavior for any such coevolving network game.
17. Title: Disturbance Decoupling for Gradient-Based Multi-Agent Learning With Quadratic Costs
Abstract: Motivated by applications of multi-agent learning in noisy environments, this letter studies the robustness of gradient-based learning dynamics with respect to disturbances. While disturbances injected along a coordinate corresponding to any individual player’s actions can always affect the overall learning dynamics, a subset of players can be disturbance decoupled—i.e., such players’ actions are completely unaffected by the injected disturbance. We provide necessary and sufficient conditions to guarantee this property for games with quadratic cost functions, which encompass quadratic one-shot continuous games, finite-horizon linear quadratic (LQ) dynamic games, and bilinear games. Specifically, disturbance decoupling is characterized by both algebraic and graph-theoretic conditions on the learning dynamics, the latter is obtained by constructing a game graph based on gradients of players’ costs. For LQ games, we show that disturbance decoupling imposes constraints on the controllable and unobservable subspaces of players. For two player bilinear games, we show that disturbance decoupling within a player’s action coordinates imposes constraints on the payoff matrices. Illustrative numerical examples are provided.
18. Title: Gradient Descent-Ascent Provably Converges to Strict Local Minmax Equilibria with a Finite Timescale Separation
Abstract: We study the role that a finite timescale separation parameter $\tau$ has on gradient descent-ascent in two-player non-convex, non-concave zero-sum games where the learning rate of player 1 is denoted by $\gamma_1$ and the learning rate of player 2 is defined to be $\gamma_2=\tau\gamma_1$. Existing work analyzing the role of timescale separation in gradient descent-ascent has primarily focused on the edge cases of players sharing a learning rate ($\tau =1$) and the maximizing player approximately converging between each update of the minimizing player ($\tau \rightarrow \infty$). For the parameter choice of $\tau=1$, it is known that the learning dynamics are not guaranteed to converge to a game-theoretically meaningful equilibria in general. In contrast, Jin et al. (2020) showed that the stable critical points of gradient descent-ascent coincide with the set of strict local minmax equilibria as $\tau\rightarrow\infty$. In this work, we bridge the gap between past work by showing there exists a finite timescale separation parameter $\tau^{\ast}$ such that $x^{\ast}$ is a stable critical point of gradient descent-ascent for all $\tau \in (\tau^{\ast}, \infty)$ if and only if it is a strict local minmax equilibrium. Moreover, we provide an explicit construction for computing $\tau^{\ast}$ along with corresponding convergence rates and results under deterministic and stochastic gradient feedback. The convergence results we present are complemented by a non-convergence result: given a critical point $x^{\ast}$ that is not a strict local minmax equilibrium, then there exists a finite timescale separation $\tau_0$ such that $x^{\ast}$ is unstable for all $\tau\in (\tau_0, \infty)$. Finally, we empirically demonstrate on the CIFAR-10 and CelebA datasets the significant impact timescale separation has on training performance.
19. Title: Stability of Gradient Learning Dynamics in Continuous Games: Vector Action Spaces
Abstract: Towards characterizing the optimization landscape of games, this paper analyzes the stability and spectrum of gradient-based dynamics near fixed points of two-player continuous games. We introduce the quadratic numerical range as a method to bound the spectrum of game dynamics linearized about local equilibria. We also analyze the stability of differential Nash equilibria and their robustness to variation in agent’s learning rates. Our results show that by decomposing the game Jacobian into symmetric and anti-symmetric components, we can assess the contribution of vector field’s potential and rotational components to the stability of the equilibrium. In zero-sum games, all differential Nash equilibria are stable; in potential games, all stable points are Nash. Furthermore, zero-sum Nash equilibria are robust in the sense that they are stable for all learning rates. For continuous games with general costs, we provide a sufficient condition for instability. We conclude with a numerical example that investigates how players with different learning rates can take advantage of rotational components of the game to converge faster.
20. Title: Safe Reinforcement Learning of Control-Affine Systems with Vertex Networks
Abstract: This paper focuses on finding reinforcement learning policies for control systems with hard state and action constraints. Despite its success in many domains, reinforcement learning is challenging to apply to problems with hard constraints, especially if both the state variables and actions are constrained. Previous works seeking to ensure constraint satisfaction, or safety, have focused on adding a projection step to a learned policy. Yet, this approach requires solving an optimization problem at every policy execution step, which can lead to significant computational costs. 
To tackle this problem, this paper proposes a new approach, termed Vertex Networks (VNs), with guarantees on safety during exploration and on learned control policies by incorporating the safety constraints into the policy network architecture. Leveraging the geometric property that all points within a convex set can be represented as the convex combination of its vertices, the proposed algorithm first learns the convex combination weights and then uses these weights along with the pre-calculated vertices to output an action. The output action is guaranteed to be safe by construction. Numerical examples illustrate that the proposed VN algorithm outperforms vanilla reinforcement learning in a variety of benchmark control tasks.
