arXiv:1411.2168v1 [math.OC] 8 Nov 2014

1
On the Characterization of Local Nash
Equilibria in Continuous Games
Lillian J. Ratliff, Samuel A. Burden,and S. Shankar Sastry,
Abstract We present a uniﬁed framework for characterizing local Nash equilibria in continuous games on either inﬁnite–dimensional or ﬁnite–dimensional non–convex strategy spaces. We provide intrinsic necessary and sufﬁcient ﬁrst– and second–order conditions ensuring strategies constitute local Nash equilibria. We term points satisfying the sufﬁcient conditions differential Nash equilibria. Further, we provide a sufﬁcient condition (non–degeneracy) guaranteeing differential Nash equilibria are isolated and show that such equilibria are structurally stable. We present tutorial examples to illustrate our results and highlight degeneracies that can arise in continuous games.
I. INTRODUCTION Many engineering systems are complex networks in which intelligent actors make decisions regarding usage of shared, yet scarce, resources. Game theory provides established techniques for modeling competitive interactions that have emerged as tools for analysis and synthesis of systems comprised of dynamically–coupled decision–making agents possessing diverse and oft– opposing interests (see, e.g. [1], [2]). We focus on games with a ﬁnite number of agents where their strategy spaces are continuous, either a ﬁnite–dimensional differentiable manifold or an inﬁnite–dimensional Banach manifold. Previous work on continuous games with convex strategy spaces and player costs led to global characterization and computation of Nash equilibria [3]–[5]. Adding constraints led to extensions
The authors are with the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, 94720 USA e-mail: tratliffl, sburden, sastryu@eecs.berkeley.edu
This work is supported by NSF CPS:Large:ActionWebs award number 0931843, TRUST (Team for Research in Ubiquitous Secure Technology) which receives support from NSF (award number CCF-0424422), FORCES (Foundations Of Resilient CybEr-physical Systems) which receives support from NSF (award number CNS-1239166).

2
of nonlinear programming concepts, such as constraint qualiﬁcation conditions, to games with generalized Nash equilibria [6]–[8]. Imposing a differentiable structure on the strategy spaces yielded other global conditions ensuring existence and uniqueness of Nash equilibria and Pareto optima [9]–[11]. In contrast, we aim to analytically characterize and numerically compute local Nash equilibria in continuous games on non–convex strategy spaces.
Bounding the rationality of agents can result in myopic behavior [12], meaning that agents seek strategies that that are optimal locally but not necessarily globally. Further, it is common in engineering applications for strategy spaces or player costs to be non–convex, for example when an agent’s conﬁguration space is a constrained set or a differentiable manifold [13], [14]. These observations suggest that techniques for characterization and computation of local Nash equilibria have important practical applications.
Motivated by systems with myopic agents and non–convex strategy spaces, we seek an intrinsic characterization for local Nash equilibria that is structurally stable and amenable to computation. By generalizing derivative–based conditions for local optimality in nonlinear programming [15] and optimal control [16], we provide necessary ﬁrst– and second–order conditions that local Nash equilibria must satisfy, and further develop a second–order sufﬁcient condition ensuring player strategies constitute a local Nash equilibrium. We term points satisfying this sufﬁcient condition differential Nash equilibria. In contrast to a pure optimization problem, this second– order condition is insufﬁcient to guarantee a differential Nash equilibrium is isolated; in fact, games may possess a continuum of differential Nash equilibria. Hence, we introduce an additional second–order condition ensuring a differential Nash equilibrium is isolated.
Verifying that a strategy constitutes a Nash equilibrium in non–trivial strategy spaces requires testing that a non–convex inequality constraint is satisﬁed on an open set, a task we regard as generally intractable. In contrast, our sufﬁcient conditions for local Nash equilibria require only the evaluation of player costs and their derivatives at single points. Further, our framework allows for numerical computations to be carried out when players’ strategy spaces and cost functions are non–convex. Hence, we provide tractable tools for characterization and computation of differential Nash equilibria in continuous games.
We show that non–degenerate differential Nash equilibria are structurally stable; hence, measurement noise and modeling errors that give rise to a nearby game do not result in drastically different equilibrium behavior—a property that is desirable in both the design of games as

3
well as inverse modeling of agent behavior in competitive environments. Further, structural stability ensures that following the ﬂow generated by the gradient of each player’s cost converges locally to a stable, non–degenerate differential Nash equilibrium. We remark that non–degenerate differential Nash equilibria are generic in the ﬁnite–dimensional case [17].
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In section II we present the game formulation in both the ﬁnite–dimensional and inﬁnite–dimensional case. We follow with the characterization of local Nash equilibria in Section III. Throughout the paper we carry an example that provides insight into the importance of the results and in Section V we return to the example in more detail. Finally, we conclude with discussion in Section VI. The necessary mathematical background and notation is contained in the Appendix.

II. GAME FORMULATION
The theory of games we consider concerns interaction between a ﬁnite number of rational agents generally having different interests and objectives. We refer to the rational agents as players. Competition arises due to the fact that the players have opposing interests.
Let us begin by considering a game in which we have n selﬁsh players with competing interests. The strategy spaces are topological spaces Mi for each i P t1, . . . , nu. Note these can be ﬁnite–dimensional smooth manifolds or inﬁnite–dimensional Banach manifolds. We denote the joint strategy space by M “ śni“1 Mi. The players are each interested in minimizing a cost function representing their interests by choosing an element from their strategy space. We deﬁne player i’s cost to be a twice–differentiable function fi P C2pM, Rq. The following deﬁnition describes the equilibrium behavior we are interested in:
Deﬁnition 1: A strategy pu1, . . . , unq P M is a local Nash equilibrium if there exist open sets Wi Ă Mi such that ui P Wi and for each i P t1, . . . , nu

fipu1, . . . , ui, . . . , unq ď fipu1, . . . , u1i, . . . , unq,

(1)

for all u1i P Wiztuiu. Further, if the above inequalities are strict, then we say pu1, . . . , unq is a strict local Nash equilibrium. If Wi “ Mi for each i, then pu1, . . . , unq is a global Nash equilibrium. Simply put, the above deﬁnition says that no player can unilaterally deviate from the Nash strategy and decrease their cost.

4

Before we move on to the characterization of local Nash equilibria, we describe the types of games the results apply to and why they are important in engineering applications.
Continuous games with ﬁnite–dimensional strategy spaces are described by the player strategy spaces M1, . . . , Mn and their cost functions pf1, . . . , fnq. They arise in a number of engineering and economic applications, for instance, in modeling one–shot decision making problems arising in transportation, communication and power networks [18]–[20]. On the other hand, continuous games with inﬁnite–dimensional strategy spaces, regarded as open–loop differential games, are used in engineering applications in which there are agents coupled through dynamics. They arise in problems such as building energy management [21], travel-time optimization in transportation networks [22], and integration of renewables into energy systems [23].
Open–loop differential games often come in the following form. Let L2r0, T s denote the space of square integrable functions from r0, T s Ă R into Rm. For an n–player game, strategy spaces are Banach manifolds, Mi for i P t1, . . . , nu, modeled on L2r0, T s. For each t P r0, T s, let xptq P Rn denote the state of the game. The state evolves according to the dynamics

x9 ptq “ hpxptq, u1ptq, . . . , unptqq @ t P r0, T s

(2)

where ui P Mi is player i’s strategy. We assume that hpx, u1, . . . , unq is continuously differ-

entiable, globally Lipschitz continuous and all the derivatives in all its arguments are globally Lipschitz continuous. We denote by fipu1, . . . , unq “ fˆipxpxp0q,u1,...,unqpT qq player i’s cost func-

tion. The superscript notation on the state x indicates the dependence of the state on the initial state and the strategies of the players. Each fˆi is assumed twice continuously differentiable so

that each fi is C2–Fre´chet–differentiable [16, Thm. 5.6.10]. We pose each player’s optimization

problem as

min fˆipxpxp0q,u1,...,ui,...,unqpT qq.

(3)

ui

The costate for player i evolves according to

p9iptq “ ´piptq Bh pxptq, u1ptq, . . . , uiptq, . . . , unptqq

(4)

Bx

with ﬁnal time condition

pipT q “ Dxfipxpxp0q,u1,...,ui,...,unqpT qq.

(5)

The derivative of the i–th player’s cost function is given by

Bh

pDifiqptq “ piptq Bui pxptq, u1, . . . , uiptq, . . . , unptqq.

(6)

5

Before we dive into the details, let us consider a simple example that exhibits very interesting

behavior.

Example 1 (Betty–Sue): Consider a two player game between Betty and Sue. Let Betty’s strategy space be M1 “ R and her cost function f1pu1, u2q “ u221 ´ u1u2. Similarly, let Sue’s strategy space be M2 “ R and her cost function f2pu1, u2q “ u222 ´u1u2. This game can be thought

of as an abstraction of two agents in a building occupying adjoining rooms. The ﬁrst term in

each of their costs represents an energy cost and the second term is a cost from thermodynamic

coupling. The agents try to maintain the temperature at a desired set–point in thermodynamic

equilibrium.

Deﬁnition 1 speciﬁes that a point pp, qq is a Nash equilibrium if no player can unilaterally

deviate and decrease their cost, i.e. f1pp, qq ă f1pu1, qq for all u1 P R and f2pp, qq ă f2pp, u2q

for all u2 P R.

Fix Sue’s strategy u2 “ q, and calculate

D1f1 “ Bf1 “ u1 ´ q (7) Bu1

Then, Betty’s optimal response to Sue playing u2 “ q is u1 “ q. Similarly, if we ﬁx u1 “ p,

then Sue’s optimal response to Betty playing u1 “ p is u2 “ p. For all u1 P Rztqu

q2 u21

´ ă ´ u1q

(8)

22

so that f1pq, qq ă f1pu1, qq for all u1 P Rztqu. Again, similarly, for all u2 P Rztpu

p2 u22

´ ă ´ u2p

(9)

22

so that f2pp, pq ă f2pp, u2q for all u2 P Rztpu. Hence, all the points on the line u1 “ u2 in

M1 ˆ M2 “ R2 are strict local Nash equilibria—in fact, they are strict global Nash equilibria.

As the above example shows, continuous games can exhibit a continuum of equilibria. Through-

out the text we will return to this example.

III. CHARACTERIZATION OF LOCAL NASH EQUILIBRIA
In this section, we characterize local Nash equilibria by paralleling results in nonlinear programming and optimal control that provide ﬁrst– and second–order necessary and sufﬁcient conditions for local optima.
The following deﬁnition of a differential game form is due to Stein [24].

6

Deﬁnition 2: A differential game form is a differential 1–form ω : M1 ˆ ¨ ¨ ¨ ˆ Mn Ñ

T ˚pM1 ˆ ¨ ¨ ¨ ˆ Mnq deﬁned by

ÿn

ω “ ψMi ˝ dfi.

(10)

i“1

where ψMi are the natural bundle maps deﬁned in (28) that annihilate those components of the

covector dfi not corresponding to Mi.

Remark 1: If each Mi is a ﬁnite–dimensional manifold of dimension mi, then the differential

game form has the following coordinate representation:

ÿn ÿ mi Bpfi ˝ ϕ´1q j ωϕ “ i“1 j“1 Byij dyi

(11)

where

pU, ϕq

is

a

product

chart

on

M

at

u

“

pu1, . . . , unq

with

local

coordinates

p

y

1 1

,

.

.

.

,

ym1, . . . , y1, . . . , ymnq and where U “ śn U and ϕ “ Śn ϕ . In addition, f ˝ ϕ´1 is the

1

n

n

i“1 i

i“1 i

i

coordinate

representation

of

fi

for

i

P

t1, . . . , nu.

In

particular,

ϕipuiq

“

p

y

1 i

,

.

.

.

,

y

mi i

q

where

each yij : Ui Ñ R is a coordinate function so that dyij is its derivative.

The differential game form captures a differential view of the strategic interaction between

the players. Indeed, ω indicates the direction in which the players can change their strategies

to decrease their individual cost functions most rapidly. Note that each player’s cost function

depends on its own choice variable as well as all the other players’ choice variables. However,

each player can only affect their payoff by adjusting their own strategy.

Deﬁnition 3: A strategy u “ pu1, . . . , unq P M1 ˆ ¨ ¨ ¨ ˆ Mn is a differential Nash equilibrium if ωpuq “ 0 and Di2ifipuq is positive–deﬁnite for each i P t1, . . . , nu.

The second–order conditions used to deﬁne differential Nash equilibria are motivated by results

in nonlinear programming that use ﬁrst– and second–order conditions to assess whether a critical

point is a local optima [16], [15].

The following proposition provides ﬁrst– and second–order necessary conditions for local

Nash equilibria. We remark that these conditions are reminiscent of those seen in nonlinear

programming for optimality of critical points.

Proposition 1: If u “ pu1, . . . , unq is a local Nash equilibrium, then ωpuq “ 0 and Di2ifipuq is positive semi-deﬁnite for each i P t1, . . . , nu.

Proof: Suppose that u “ pu1, . . . , unq P M is a local Nash equilibrium. Then,

fipuq ď fipu1, . . . , u1i, . . . , unq, @ u1i P Wiztuiu

(12)

7

for open Wi Ă Mi, i P t1, . . . , nu. Suppose that we have a product chart pU, ϕq, where U “ śni“1 Ui and ϕ “ Śni“1 ϕi, such that u P U .
Let ϕipuiq “ vi for each i. Then, since ϕ is continuous, for each i P t1, . . . , nu, we have that for all vi1 P ϕipWi X Uiqztϕipuiqu,

fi ˝ ϕ´1pv1, . . . , vi, . . . , vnq ď fi ˝ ϕ´1pv1, . . . , vi1, . . . , vnq.

(13)

Now, we apply Proposition 1.1.1 from [15], if Mi is ﬁnite–dimensional, or Theorem 4.2.3(1) and Theorem 4.2.4(a) from [16], if Mi is inﬁnite–dimensional, to fi ˝ ϕ´1. We conclude that for each i P t1, . . . , nu, Dipfi ˝ ϕ´1qpv1, . . . , vnq “ 0 and for all ν P ϕipUi X Wiq,

Di2ipfi ˝ ϕ´1qpv1, . . . , vnqpν, νq ě α}ν}2,

(14)

i.e. it is a positive semi–deﬁnite bilinear form on ϕipUi X Wiq. Invariance of the stationarity of critical points and the index of the Hessian with respect to
coordinate change gives us ωpuq “ 0 and Di2ifipuq is a positive semi–deﬁnite for each i P t1, . . . , nu.
We now show that the conditions deﬁning a differential Nash equilibrium are sufﬁcient to guarantee a strict local Nash equilibrium.
Theorem 1: A differential Nash equilibrium is a strict local Nash equilibrium. Proof: Suppose that u “ pu1, . . . , unq P M is a differential Nash equilibrium. Then, by the
deﬁnition of differential Nash equilibrium, ωpuq “ 0 and Di2ifipuq is positive deﬁnite for each i P t1, . . . , nu. The second-derivative conditions imply that Di2ipfi˝ϕ´1qpv1, . . . , vnq is a positive–
Ś deﬁnite bilinear form where vi “ ϕipuiq for any coordinate chart pU, ϕq, with ϕ “ i ϕi,
ś U “ i Ui, and ui P Ui for each i P t1, . . . , nu.
Using the isomorphism introduced in the appendix in (27), ωpuq “ 0 implies that for each i P t1, . . . , nu, Dipfi ˝ ϕ´1qpv1, . . . , vnq “ 0. Let Ei be the model space, i.e. the underlying Banach space, in either the ﬁnite–dimensional or inﬁnite–dimensional case. Applying either Proposition 1.1.3 from [15] or Theorem 4.2.6 (a) from [16] to to each fi ˝ ϕ´1 with pϕ1pu1q, . . . , ϕi´1pui´1q, ϕi`1pui`1q, . . . , ϕnpunqq ﬁxed yields a neighborhood Wi Ă Ei such that for all v1 P Wi,

fi ˝ ϕ´1pv1, . . . , vi, . . . , vnq ă fi ˝ ϕ´1pv1, . . . , v1, . . . , vnq.

(15)

8

Since ϕ is continuous, there exists a neighborhood Vi Ă Mi of ui such that for Vi “ ϕ´i 1pWiq and all u1i P Viztuiu,

fipu1, . . . , ui, . . . , unq ă fipu1, . . . , u1i, . . . , unq.

(16)

Therefore, differential Nash equilibria are strict local Nash equilibria. Due to the fact that both

ωpuq “ 0 and deﬁniteness of the Hessian are coordinate invariant, this is independent of choice

of coordinate chart.

We remark that the conditions for differential Nash equilibria are not sufﬁcient to guarantee

that an equilibrium is isolated.

Example 1 (Betty–Sue: Continuum of Differential Nash): Returning to the Betty–Sue example,

we can check that at all the points such that u1 “ u2, ωpu1, u2q “ 0 and Di2ifipu1, u2q “ 1 ą 0 for each i P t1, 2u. Hence, there is a continuum of differential Nash equilibria in this game.

We propose a sufﬁcient condition to guarantee that differential Nash equilibria are isolated. We

do so by combining ideas introduced by Rosen for convex games with concepts from Morse

theory, in particular second–order conditions on non–degenerate critical points of real-valued

functions on manifolds.

At a differential Nash equilibrium u “ pu1, . . . , unq, consider the derivative of the differential

game form

ÿn

dω “ dpψMi ˝ dfiq.

(17)

i“1

Intrinsically, this derivative is a tensor ﬁeld dω P T20pMq; at a point u P M where ωpuq “ 0 it is

a bilinear form constructed from the uniquely determined continuous, symmetric, bilinear forms td2fipuquni“1.
Theorem 2: If u “ pu1, . . . , unq is a differential Nash equilibrium and dωpuq is non–degenerate,

then u is an isolated strict local Nash equilibrium.

Proof: Since u is a differential Nash equilibrium, Theorem 1 gives us that it is a strict local

Nash equilibrium. The following argument shows that it is isolated. Choose a coordinate chart pU, ϕq with ϕ “ Śni“1 ϕi and U “ śni“1 Ui. Let E denote the underlying model space of the

manifold M1 ˆ ¨ ¨ ¨ ˆ Mn. Deﬁne the map g : E Ñ E by

ÿn

gpϕpuqq “ Dipfi ˝ ϕ´1qpϕpuqq

(18)

i“1

9

Note that g is the coordinate representation of the differential game form ω. Zeros of the

function g deﬁne critical points of the game and its derivative at critical points is dω. Since u is a differential Nash equilibrium, ωpuq “ 0. Further, since dωpuq is non–degenerate—the map Apvqpwq “ dωpuqpv, wq is a linear isomorphism—we can apply the Inverse Function Theorem [25, Thm. 2.5.2] to get that g is a local diffeomorphism at u, i.e. there exists an

open neighborhood V of u such that the restriction of g to V establishes a diffeomorphism between V and an open subset of E. Thus, only ϕpuq could be mapped to zero near ϕpuq. Non–degeneracy of dωpuq is invariant with respect to choice of coordinates. Therefore, u is

isolated. Deﬁnition 4: Differential Nash equilibira u “ pu1, . . . , unq such that dωpuq is non–degenerate
are termed non–degenerate differential Nash equilibria.

Example 1 (Betty–Sue: Degeneracy and Breaking Symmetry): Return again to the Betty–Sue

example in which we showed that there is a continuum of Nash equilibria; in fact, all the points

on the line u1 “ u2 are differential Nash equilibria and at each of these points we have

»

ﬁ

dωpu1, u2q “ – 1 ´1ﬂ (19)

´1 1

so that detpdωpu1, u2qq “ 0. Hence, all of the equilibria are degenerate. By breaking the symme-

try in the game, we can make p0, 0q a non–degenerate differential Nash equilibrium; i.e. we can remove all but one of the equilibria. Indeed, let Betty’s cost be given by f˜1pu1, u2q “ u221 ´ au1u2

and let Sue’s cost remain unchanged. Then the local representation of the derivative of the

differential game form ωr of the game pfr1, f2q is

»

ﬁ

dωrpu1, u2q “ – 1 ´aﬂ (20)

´1 1

Thus for any value of a ‰ 1, p0, 0q is a non–degenerate differential Nash equilibrium. This

shows that small modeling errors can remove degenerate differential Nash equilibria.

In a neighborhood of a non–degenerate differential Nash equilibrium there are no other Nash

equilibria. This property is desirable particularly in applications where a central planner is

designing incentives to induce a socially optimal or otherwise desirable equilibrium that optimizes

the central planner’s cost; if the desired equilibrium resides on a continuum of equilibria, then

due to measurement noise or myopic play, agents may be induced to play a nearby equilibrium

10
that is suboptimal for the central planner. In Section V, we extend Example 1 by introducing a central planner. But ﬁrst, we show that non–degenerate differential Nash equilibria are structurally stable.
IV. STRUCTURAL STABILITY
Examples demonstrate that global Nash equilibria may fail to persist under arbitrarily small changes in player costs [10]. A natural question arises: do local Nash equilibria persist under perturbations? Applying structural stability analysis from dynamical systems theory, we answer this question afﬁrmatively for nondegenerate differential Nash equilibria subject to smooth perturbations in player costs.
Let M “ M1 ˆ ¨ ¨ ¨ ˆ Mn and f1, . . . , fn : M Ñ R be C2 player cost functions, ω : M Ñ T ˚M the associated differential game form (10), and suppose u P M is a non–degenerate differential Nash equilibrium, i.e. ωpuq “ 0 and dωpuq is non–degenerate. We show that for all fri P C8pM, Rq sufﬁciently close to fi there exists a unique non–degenerate differential Nash equilibrium ur P M for pfr1, . . . , frnq near u.
Proposition 2 (Parameterized Structural Stability): Non–degenerate differential Nash equilibria are parametrically structurally stable: given f1, . . . , fn P C2pM, Rq, ζ1, . . . , ζn P C2pM, Rq, and a non–degenerate differential Nash equilibrium u P M for pf1, . . . , fnq, there exist neighborhoods U Ă R of 0 and W Ă M of u such that for all s P U there exists a unique non–degenerate differential Nash equilibrium urpsq P W for pf1 ` sζ1, . . . , fn ` sζnq.
Proof: Deﬁne frj : M1 ˆ ¨ ¨ ¨ ˆ Mn ˆ R Ñ R by frjpu, sq “ fjpuq ` sζjpuq
and ωr : M1 ˆ ¨ ¨ ¨ ˆ Mn ˆ R Ñ T ˚pM1 ˆ ¨ ¨ ¨ ˆ Mnq by ÿn
ωrpu, sq “ ψrM ˝ dfripu, sq i i“1
for all s P R and u P M1 ˆ ¨ ¨ ¨ ˆ Mn and where ψrMi : T ˚pM1 ˆ ¨ ¨ ¨ ˆ Mn ˆ Rq Ñ T ˚pM1 ˆ ¨ ¨ ¨ ˆ Mn ˆ Rq. Observe that D1ωrppu1, . . . , unq, 0q is invertible since u is a non–degenerate differential Nash equilibrium for pf1, . . . , fnq. Therefore by the Implicit Function Theorem [25, Prop. 3.3.13 (iii)], there exist neighborhoods V Ă R of 0 and W Ă M of u and a smooth function σ P C8pV, W q such that
@s P V, u P W : ωrpu, sq “ 0 ðñ u “ σpsq.

11

Furthermore, since ωr is continuously differentiable, there exists a neighborhood U Ă V of 0

such that dωrpσpsq, sq is invertible for all s P U. We conclude for all s P U that σpsq P M is the

unique Nash equilibrium for ppf1 ` sζ1q |W , . . . , pfn ` sζnq |W q, and furthermore that σpsq is a

non–degenerate differential Nash equilibrium.

We remark that the preceding analysis extends directly to any ﬁnitely–parameterized pertur-

bation. For an arbitrary perturbation, we have the following.

Theorem 3 (Structural Stability): Non–degenerate differential Nash equilibria are structurally

stable: let u P M be a non–degenerate differential Nash equilibrium for pf1, . . . , fnq P C2pM, Rnq.

Then there exist neighborhoods U Ă C2pM, Rnq of pf1, . . . , fnq and W Ă M of u and a

C2 Fre´chet–differentiable function σ P C2pU, W q such that for all pfr1, . . . , frnq P U the point

σpfr1, . . . , frnq is the unique non–degenerate differential Nash equilibrium for pfr1, . . . , fr2q in W .

Proof: Consider the operator Ω P C1pC1pM, Rnq ˆ M, Rnq deﬁned by

ÿn

Ωppfr1, . . . , frnq, pu1, . . . , unqq “ ψM ˝ dfripu1, . . . , unq.

(21)

i

i“1

Note that the right–hand side is the differential game form ωrpu1, . . . , unq for the game pfr1, . . . , frnq.

Suppose that u “ pu1, . . . , unq is a non-degenerate differential Nash equilibrium. A straightforward application of Proposition 2.4.20 [25] implies that the operator Ω is C1 Fre´chet–

differentiable. In addition,

D2Ωppf1, . . . , fnq, pu1, . . . , unqq “ dωpu1, . . . , unq.

(22)

Since dωpuq is an isomorphism by assumption, we can apply the Implicit Function Theorem [25, Prop. 3.3.13 (iii)] to Ω to get an open neighborhood W Ă M of u and V Ă C2pM, Rnq of pf1, . . . , fnq and a smooth function σ P C2pV, W q such that
@f˜ P V, v P W : Ωpf˜, vq “ 0 ðñ v “ σpf˜q
where f˜ “ pf˜1, . . . , f˜nq. Furthermore, since Ω is continuously differentiable, there exists a neighborhood U Ă V of pf1, . . . , fnq such that dΩpf˜, σpf˜qq is invertible for all f˜ P U. Thus, for all f˜ P U, σpf˜q P M is the unique non–degenerate differential Nash equilibrium.
Let us return to Example 1 and examine what can happen in the degenerate case. Example 1 (Betty–Sue: Structural Instability): Let us recall again the Betty–Sue example in which we have a game admitting a continuum of differential Nash equilibria. We can show that

12

an arbitrarily small perturbation will make all the equilibria disappear. Indeed, let ε ‰ 0 be

arbitrarily small and consider Betty’s perturbed cost function

f˜ pu , u q “ u21 ´ u u ` εu .

(23)

11 2

2

12

1

Let Sue’s cost function remain unchanged. Then, all Nash equilibria disappear. Indeed, a neces-

sary condition that a Nash equilibrium pu1, u2q P M1 ˆ M2 must satisfy is ωpu1, u2q “ 0 thereby implying D1f˜1pu1, u2q “ u1 ´ u2 ` ε “ 0 and D2f2pu1, u2q “ u2 ´ u1 “ 0. This can only happen for ε “ 0. Hence, any perturbation εu1 with ε ‰ 0 will remove all the Nash equilibria.

On the other hand, equilibria that are stable—thereby attracting using decoupled myopic

approximate best-response—persist under small perturbations [26].

Example 2 (Convergence of Gradient Play): We adopt a dynamical systems perspective of

a two–player game over the strategy space U1 ˆ U2 with player costs f1, f2 : U1 ˆ U2 Ñ R.

Speciﬁcally, we consider the continuous–time dynamical system generated by the negative of

the player’s individual gradients:

» ﬁ»

ﬁ

– u9 1 ﬂ “ – ´D1f1pu1, u2q ﬂ “ ´ωpuq.

(24)

u9 2

´D2f2pu1, u2q

If pµ1, µ2q P U1 ˆ U2 is a differential Nash equilibrium, then ωpµ1, µ2q “ 0. These dynamics

are uncoupled in the sense the dynamics u9 i for each player do not depend on the cost function

of the other player. It is known that such uncoupled dynamics need not converge to local Nash

equilibria [27]. However, the subset of non–degenerate differential Nash equilibria where the

spectrum of dω is strictly in the right–half plane (in the ﬁnite–dimensional case, this corresponds

to all eigenvalues of dω having strictly positive real parts) are exponentially stable stationary

points of (24) [26, Prop. 4], [25, Thm. 4.3.4]. Theorem 3 shows that convergence of uncoupled

gradient play to such stable non–degenerate differential Nash equilibria persists under small

smooth perturbations to player costs.

We remark that in the ﬁnite–dimensional case we can show that non–degenerate differential

Nash equilibria are generic among local Nash equilibria [17]. Genericity implies that local

Nash equilibria in an open–dense set of continuous games are non–degenerate differential Nash

equilibria. Furthermore, structural stability implies that these equilibria persist under smooth

perturbations to player costs. As a consequence, small modeling errors or environmental distur-

bances generally do not result in games with drastically different equilibrium behavior.

13

V. INDUCING A NASH EQUILIBRIUM
The problem of inducing Nash equilibria through incentive mechanisms appears in engineering applications including energy management [21] and network security [28], [29]. The central planner aims to shift the Nash equilibrium of the agents’ game to one that is desirable from its perspective. Thus the central planner optimizes its cost subject to constraints given by the inequalities that deﬁne a Nash equilibrium. This requires veriﬁcation of non–convex conditions on an open set—a generally intractable task. A natural solution is to replace these inequalities with ﬁrst– and second–order sufﬁcient conditions on each agent’s optimization problem. As the Betty– Sue example shows (Example 1), these necessary conditions are not enough to guarantee the desired Nash is isolated; the additional constraint that dω be non–degenerate must be enforced.
Example 1 (Betty–Sue: Inducing Nash): Consider a central planner who desires to optimize the cost of deviating from the temperature τ :

fppu1, u2q “ pu1 ´ τ q2 ` pu2 ´ τ q2.

(25)

The central planner wants to induce the agents to play pu1, u2q “ pτ, τ q by selecting a P R and

augmenting Betty’s and Sue’s costs:

frapu1, u2q “ f1pu2, u2q ` a pu1 ´ τ q2

1

2

frapu1, u2q “ f2pu1, u2q ` a pu2 ´ τ q2.

2

2

The differential game form of the augmented game pfr1a, fr2aq is

ωrpu1, u2q “ pu1 ´ u2 ` apu1 ´ τ qqdu1 ` pu2 ´ u1 ` apu2 ´ τ qqdu2

and the second–order differential game form is »
dωrpu1, u2q “ –1 ` a ´1

ﬁ ´1 ﬂ . 1`a

For any a P p´1, 8q, pτ, τ q is a differential Nash equilibrium of pfr1a, fr2aq since ωrpτ, τ q “ 0 and d2iifriapτ, τ q ą 0. For any a P p´1, 0s, the game pfr1a, fr2aq undesirable behavior. Indeed, recall Example 2 in which we consider the gradient dynamics for a two player game. For values of a P p´1, 0q, dωr is indeﬁnite so that the equilibrium of the gradient system is a saddle point.

Hence, if agents perform gradient play and happen to initialize on the unstable manifold, then

14
they will not converge to any equilibrium. Further, while a “ 0 seems like a natural choice since it means not augmenting the players costs at all, it in fact gives rise to a continuum of equilibria. However, for a ą 0, dωr is positive deﬁnite so that, as Example 2 points out, the gradient dynamics will converge and the value of a determines the contraction rate.
This example indicates how undesirable behavior can arise when the operator dω is degenerate. Further, if the goal is to induce a particular Nash equilibrium amongst competitive agents, then it is not enough to consider only necessary and sufﬁcient conditions for Nash equilibria; inducing stable non–degenerate differential Nash equilibria leads to desirable and structurally stable behavior.
VI. DISCUSSION By paralleling results in non–linear programming and optimal control, we developed ﬁrst– and second–order necessary and sufﬁcient conditions that characterize local Nash equilibria in continuous games on both ﬁnite– and inﬁnite–dimensional strategy spaces. We further provided a second–order sufﬁcient condition guaranteeing differential Nash equilibria are non–degenerate and, hence, isolated. We showed that non–degenerate differential Nash equilibria are structurally stable and thus small modeling errors or environmental disturbances generally will not result in games with drastically different equilibrium behavior. Further, as a result of structural stability, our characterization of non–degenerate differential Nash equilibria is amenable to computation. We illustrate through an example that such a characterization has value for the design of incentives to induce a desired equilibria. By enforcing not only non–degeneracy but also stability of a differential Nash equilibrium, the central planner can ensure that the desired equilibrium is isolated and that gradient play will converge locally.
APPENDIX MATHEMATICAL PRELIMIARIES This appendix contains the standard mathematical objects used throughout this paper (see [25], [30] for a more detailed introduction). Suppose that M is second–countable and a Hausdorff topological space. Then a chart on M is a homeomorphism ϕ from an open subset U of M to an open subset of a Banach space. We sometimes denote a chart by the pair pU, ϕq. Two charts pU1, ϕ1q and pU2, ϕ2q are Cr–compatible

15
if and only if the composition ϕ2 ˝ ϕ´1 1 : ϕ1pU1 X U2q Ñ ϕ2pU1 X U2q is a Cr–diffeomorphism. A Cr–atlas on M is a collection of charts tpUα, ϕαquαPA any two of which are Cr–compatible and such that the Uα’s cover M. A smooth manifold is a topological manifold with a smooth atlas. We use the term manifold generally; we specify whether it is a ﬁnite– or inﬁnite–dimensional manifold only when it is not clear from context. If a covering by charts takes their values in a Banach space E, then E is called the model space and we say that M is a Cr–Banach manifold. We remark that one can form a manifold modeled on any linear space in which one has theory of differential calculus; we use Banach manifolds so that we can utilize the inverse function theorem.
Suppose that f : M Ñ N where M, N are Ck–manifolds. We say f is of class Cr with 0 ď r ď k, and we write f P CrpM, Nq, if for each u P M and a chart pV, ψq of N with f puq P V , there is a chart pU, ϕq of M satisfying u P U, f pUq Ă V , and such that the local representation of f , namely ψ ˝ f ˝ ϕ´1, is of class Cr. If N “ R, then ψ can be taken to be the identity map so that the local representation is given by f ˝ ϕ´1.
Each u P M has an associated tangent space TuM, and the disjoint union of the tangent spaces š
is the tangent bundle T M “ uPM TuM. The co-tangent space to M at u P M, denoted Tu˚M, is the set of all real-valued linear functionals—or, simply, the dual—on the tangent space TuM,
š and the disjoint union of the co–tangent spaces is the co–tangent bundle T ˚M “ uPM Tu˚M. Both T M and T ˚M are naturally smooth manifolds [25, Thm. 3.3.10 and Ch. 5.2 resp.].
For a vector space E we deﬁne the vector space of continuous pr ` sq–multilinear maps TsrpEq “ Lr`spE˚, . . . , E˚, E, . . . , E; Rq with s copies of E and r copes of E˚ and where E˚ denotes the dual. We say elements of TsrpEq are tensors on E, contravariant of order r and covariant of order s. Further, we use the notation TsrpMq to denote the vector bundle of tensors contravariant of order r and covariant of order s [25, Def. 5.2.9]. In this notation, T01pMq is identiﬁed with the tangent bundle T M and T10pMq with the cotangent bundle T ˚M.
Suppose f : M Ñ N is a mapping of one manifold into another, and u P M, then by means of charts we can interpret the derivative of f on each chart at u as a linear mapping df puq : TuM Ñ TfpuqN. When N “ R, the collection of such maps deﬁnes a 1–form df : M Ñ T ˚M . More generally, a 1–form is a continuous map ω : M Ñ T ˚M satisfying π ˝ ω “ IdM where π : T ˚M Ñ M is the natural projection mapping ωppq P Tp˚M to p P M.
A point u P M is said to be a critical point of a map f P CrpM, Rq, r ě 2 if df puq “ 0.

16

At a critical point u P M, there is a uniquely determined continuous, symmetric, bilinear form (termed the Hessian) d2f puq P T20pMq such that d2f puq is deﬁned for all v, w P TuM by d2pf ˝ ϕ´1qpϕpuqqpvϕ, wϕq where ϕ is any product chart at u and vϕ, wϕ are the local representations of v, w respectively [31, Prop. in §7]. We say d2f puq is positive semi–deﬁnite if there exists α ě 0 such that for any chart ϕ,

d2pf ˝ ϕ´1qpϕpuqqpv, vq ě α}v}2, @ v P TϕpuqE.

(26)

If α ą 0, then we say d2f puq is positive–deﬁnite. Both ωpuq “ 0 and positive deﬁniteness are

invariant with respect to the choice of coordinate chart.

Given a Banach space E and a bounded, symmetric bilinear form B on E, we say that B

is non–degenerate if the linear map A : E Ñ E˚ deﬁned by Apvqpwq “ Bpv, wq is a linear

isomorphism of E onto E˚, otherwise B is degenerate. A critical point u of f is called non–

degenerate if the Hessian of f at u is non–degenerate [31, Def. in §7]. Degeneracy is independent

of the choice of coordinate chart. Consider smooth manifolds M1, . . . , Mn. The product space śni“1 Mi “ M1 ˆ ¨ ¨ ¨ ˆ Mn is
naturally a smooth manifold [25, Def. 3.2.4]. In particular, there is an atlas on M1 ˆ ¨ ¨ ¨ ˆ Mn

composed of product charts pU1 ˆ ¨ ¨ ¨ ˆ Un, ϕ1 ˆ ¨ ¨ ¨ ˆ ϕnq where pUi, ϕiq is a chart on Mi for i P t1, . . . , nu. We use the notation Śni“1 ϕi “ ϕ1 ˆ ¨ ¨ ¨ ˆ ϕn and śni“1 Ui “ U1 ˆ ¨ ¨ ¨ ˆ Un.
There is a canonical isomorphism at each point such that the cotangent bundle of the product

manifold splits:

Tp˚u1,...,unqpM1 ˆ ¨ ¨ ¨ ˆ Mnq – Tu˚1 M1 ‘ ¨ ¨ ¨ ‘ Tu˚nMn

(27)

where ‘ denotes the direct sum of vector spaces. There are natural bundle maps

ψMi : T ˚pM1 ˆ ¨ ¨ ¨ ˆ Mnq Ñ T ˚pM1 ˆ ¨ ¨ ¨ ˆ Mnq

(28)

annihilating the all the components other than those corresponding to Mi of an element in the cotangent bundle for each i P t1, . . . , nu. In particular, ψMipω1, . . . , ωnq “ p0, . . . , 0, ωi, 0, . . . , 0q where ω “ pω1, . . . , ωnq P Tu˚pM1 ˆ ¨ ¨ ¨ ˆ Mnq and 0 is the zero functional in Tu˚j Mj for each j ‰ i.
Let M “ M1 ˆ¨ ¨ ¨ˆMn. Given a point u “ pu1, . . . , unq P M , then ιju : Mj Ñ M is the natural inclusion map where ιjupµq “ pu1, . . . , uj´1, µ, uj`1, . . . , unq. Suppose we have a function f : M Ñ R. Then the derivatives Dif puq of the map µi ÞÑ f pu1, . . . , ui´1, µi, ui`1, . . . , unq where

17
µi P Mi for each i P t1, . . . , nu are called the partial derivatives of f at u P M [25, Prop. 2.4.12]. They are given by Dif puqpviq “ df puqpv¯iq where vi P TuiMi and v¯i “ p0, . . . , 0, vi, 0, . . . , 0q P TuM . Indeed, dιiu : TuiM Ñ TuM is a map such that dιiupuiqpviq “ v¯i. Hence, by the chain rule, we have Dif puq “ dpf ˝ ιiuqpuiq “ df puq ˝ dιiu. Further, we have that for v “ pv1, . . . , vnq, df puqpvq “ řni“1 Dif puqpviq. For second–order partial derivatives, we use the notation Di2jf puq “ DipDjf qpuq.
REFERENCES
[1] P. Frihauf, M. Krstic, and T. Bas¸ar, “Nash equilibrium seeking in noncooperative games,” IEEE Trans. Automat. Control, vol. 57, no. 5, pp. 1192–1207, 2012.
[2] J. Shamma and G. Arslan, “Dynamic ﬁctitious play, dynamic gradient play, and distributed convergence to Nash equilibria,” IEEE Trans. Automat. Control, vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 312–327, 2005.
[3] S. Li and T. Bas¸ar, “Distributed algorithms for the computation of noncooperative equilibria,” Automatica, vol. 23, no. 4, pp. 523–533, 1987.
[4] T. Bas¸ar, “Relaxation techniques and asynchronous algorithms for on-line computation of non-cooperative equilibria,” J. of Economic Dynamics and Control, vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 531–549, 1987.
[5] J. Contreras, M. Klusch, and J. Krawczyk, “Numerical solutions to Nash–Cournot equilibria in coupled constraint electricity markets,” IEEE Trans. Power Syst., vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 195–206, 2004.
[6] D. Dorsch, H. Jongen, and V. Shikhman, “On structure and computation of generalized nash equilibria,” SIAM J. on Optimization, vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 452–474, 2013.
[7] J. B. Rosen, “Existence and uniqueness of equilibrium points for concave n-person games,” Econometrica, vol. 33, no. 3, p. 520, 1965.
[8] F. Facchinei, A. Fischer, and V. Piccialli, “On generalized Nash games and variational inequalities,” Oper. Res. Lett., vol. 35, no. 2, pp. 159–164, 2007.
[9] R. Thom, “L’optimisation simultane´e et la the´orie des jeux en topologie diffe´rentielle,” Comptes rendus des Journe´es Mathe´matiques de la Socie´te´ Mathe´matique de France, vol. 3, pp. 63–70, 1974.
[10] I. Ekeland, “Topologie diffe´rentielle et the´orie des jeux,” Topology, vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 375–388, 1974. [11] S. Smale, “Global analysis and economics,” Synthese, vol. 31, no. 2, pp. 345–358, 1975. [12] S. D. Fla˚m, “Restricted attention, myopic play, and the learning of equilibrium,” Ann. of Oper. Res., vol. 82, pp. 473–482,
1998. [13] A. Muhammad and M. Egerstedt, “Decentralized coordination with local interactions: Some new directions,” in Cooperative
Control. Springer, 2005, pp. 153–170. [14] E. Klavins and D. E. Koditschek, “Phase regulation of decentralized cyclic robotic systems,” The Int. J. of Robotics
Research, vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 257–275, 2002. [15] D. P. Bertsekas, Nonlinear programming. Athena Scientiﬁc, 1999. [16] E. Polak, Optimization: algorithms and consistent approximations. Springer New York, 1997. [17] L. J. Ratliff, S. A. Burden, and S. S. Sastry, “Generictiy and structural stability of non–degenerate differential Nash
equilibria,” in Proc. of the American Control Conf., 2014.

18
[18] W. Krichene, J. Reilly, S. Amin, and A. Bayen, “Stackelberg routing on parallel networks with horizontal queues,” IEEE Trans. Automat. Control, vol. 59, no. 3, pp. 714–727, 2014.
[19] U. O. Candogan, I. Menache, A. Ozdaglar, and P. A. Parrilo, “Near-optimal power control in wireless networks: a potential game approach,” in Proc. of the 29th IEEE Conf. on Information Communications, 2010, pp. 1–9.
[20] J.-B. Park, B. H. Kim, J.-H. Kim, M.-H. Jung, and J.-K. Park, “A continuous strategy game for power transactions analysis in competitive electricity markets,” IEEE Trans. Power Syst., vol. 16, no. 4, pp. 847–855, Nov. 2001.
[21] S. Coogan, L. J. Ratliff, D. Calderone, C. Tomlin, and S. S. Sastry, “Energy management via pricing in LQ dynamic games,” in Proc. of the American Control Conf., 2013, pp. 443–448.
[22] A. Bressan and K. Han, “Nash equilibria for a model of trafﬁc ﬂow with several groups of drivers,” ESAIM: Control, Optimisation and Calculus of Variations, vol. 18, no. 04, pp. 969–986, 2012.
[23] Q. Zhu, J. Zhang, P. Sauer, A. Dominguez-Garcia, and T. Bas¸ar, “A game-theoretic framework for control of distributed renewable-based energy resources in smart grids,” in Proc. of the American Control Conf., June 2012, pp. 3623–3628.
[24] N. Stein, “Games on manifolds,” 2010, unpublished notes (personal correspondence). [25] R. Abraham, J. E. Marsden, and T. Ratiu, Manifolds, Tensor Analysis, and Applications, 2nd ed. Springer, 1988. [26] L. J. Ratliff, S. A. Burden, and S. S. Sastry, “Characterization and computation of local Nash equilibria in continuous
games,” in Proc. of the 51st Annu. Allerton Conf. on Communication, Control, and Computing, 2013. [27] S. Hart and A. Mas-Colell, “Uncoupled dynamics do not lead to Nash equilibrium,” American Economic Review, vol. 93,
no. 5, pp. 1830–1836, 2003. [28] L. J. Ratliff, S. Coogan, D. Calderone, and S. S. Sastry, “Pricing in linear-quadratic dynamic games,” in Proc. of the 50th
Annu. Allerton Conf. on Communication, Control, and Computing, 2012, pp. 1798–1805. [29] Q. Zhu, C. J. Fung, R. Boutaba, and T. Bas¸ar, “Guidex: A game-theoretic incentive-based mechanism for intrusion detection
networks,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., pp. 2220–2230, 2012. [30] J. M. Lee, Introduction to smooth manifolds, 2nd ed. Springer, 2012. [31] R. S. Palais, “Morse theory on hilbert manifolds,” Topology, vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 299–340, 1963.

