QuAC : Question Answering in Context

Eunsol Choi ♥ He He ♦ Wen-tau Yih† Yejin Choi♥†

Mohit Iyyer ♣† Mark Yatskar † Percy Liang♦ Luke Zettlemoyer♥

Allen Institute for Artiﬁcial Intelligence† University of Washington♥ Stanford University♦ UMass Amherst♣

{eunsol,yejin,lsz}@cs.washington.edu {hehe,pliang}@cs.stanford.edu
{mohiti,marky,scottyih}@allenai.org

arXiv:1808.07036v3 [cs.CL] 28 Aug 2018

Abstract
We present QuAC, a dataset for Question Answering in Context that contains 14K information-seeking QA dialogs (100K questions in total). The dialogs involve two crowd workers: (1) a student who poses a sequence of freeform questions to learn as much as possible about a hidden Wikipedia text, and (2) a teacher who answers the questions by providing short excerpts from the text. QuAC introduces challenges not found in existing machine comprehension datasets: its questions are often more open-ended, unanswerable, or only meaningful within the dialog context, as we show in a detailed qualitative evaluation. We also report results for a number of reference models, including a recently state-ofthe-art reading comprehension architecture extended to model dialog context. Our best model underperforms humans by 20 F1, suggesting that there is signiﬁcant room for future work on this data. Dataset, baseline, and leaderboard available at http://quac.ai.
1 Introduction
In information-seeking dialog, students repeatedly ask teachers questions to learn about a topic of interest (Stede and Schlangen, 2004). Modeling such conversations is challenging, as the questions can be highly context-dependent, elliptical, and even unanswerable. To enable learning from rich information-seeking dialog, we present QuAC (henceforth ), a large-scale dataset for Question Answering in Context that contains 14K crowdsourced QA dialogs (100K total QA pairs).1
Figure 1 shows an example dialog. The interaction is student driven and centered around a short evidence text (a section from Daffy Duck’s
1We use “dialog” to refer to a sequence of QA pairs. Authors contributed equally.

Section: Daffy Duck, Origin & History

STUDENT: TEACHER: STUDENT: TEACHER: STUDENT: TEACHER:

What is the origin of Daffy Duck? → ﬁrst appeared in Porky’s Duck Hunt
What was he like in that episode? → assertive, unrestrained, combative
Was he the star? →¯ No, barely more than an unnamed

bit player in this short STUDENT: Who was the star? TEACHER: → No answer

STUDENT: Did he change a lot from that ﬁrst episode in future episodes?

TEACHER: → Yes, the only aspects of the char-

acter that have remained consistent (...) are his

voice characterization by Mel Blanc STUDENT: How has he changed? TEACHER: → Daffy was less anthropomorphic STUDENT: In what other ways did he change? TEACHER: → Daffy’s slobbery, exaggerated lisp

(...) is barely noticeable in the early cartoons. STUDENT: Why did they add the lisp? TEACHER: → One often-repeated “ofﬁcial” story

is that it was modeled after producer Leon

Schlesinger’s tendency to lisp. STUDENT: Is there an “unofﬁcial” story?

TEACHER: → Yes, Mel Blanc (...) contradicts

that conventional belief ...

Figure 1: An example dialog about a Wikipedia section. The student, who does not see the section text, asks questions. The teacher provides a response in the form of a text span (or No answer ), optionally yes or no ( Yes / No ), and encouragement about continuing a line of questioning (should, → , could →¯ , or should
not → ask a follow-up question).

Wikipedia page), which only the teacher can access. Given just the section’s heading, “Origin & History”, the student aims to learn as much as possible about its contents by asking questions. The teacher answers these questions with spans from the evidence text, as in existing reading comprehension tasks (Rajpurkar et al., 2016). Additionally, the teacher uses dialog acts to provide the student with feedback (e.g., “ask a follow up ques-

Dataset
QuAC
CoQA (Reddy et al., 2018) CSQA (Saha et al., 2018) CQA (Talmor and Berant, 2018) SQA (Iyyer et al., 2017) NarrativeQA (Kocisky´ et al., 2017) TriviaQA (Joshi et al., 2017) SQuAD 2.0 (Rajpurkar et al., 2018) MS Marco (Nguyen et al., 2016) NewsQA (Trischler et al., 2016)

Multi turn

        

Textbased

        

Dialog Acts

        

Simple Evaluation

        

Unanswerable Questions

        

Asker Can’t See Evidence

        

Table 1: Comparison of the QUAC dataset to other question answering datasets.

tion”), which makes the dialogs more productive.

We collect the dataset in an interactive set-

ting where two crowd workers play the roles of

teacher and student. To encourage natural and di-

verse questions, we do not follow previous dialog-

style QA datasets that semi-automatically generate

questions (Talmor and Berant, 2018; Saha et al.,

2018). Furthermore, unlike QA datasets such as

SQuAD and CoQA (Reddy et al., 2018), students

in

do not know the answers to their ques-

tions prior to asking them, which lessens the role

of string matching and simple paraphrasing in an-

swering their questions. This property makes

similar to datasets that contain real user queries on

search engines (Nguyen et al., 2016).

contains many challenging phenomena

unique to dialog, such as coreference to previous

questions and answers and open-ended questions

that must be answered without repeating previ-

ous information (Section 3). Additionally, despite

lacking access to the section text, we ﬁnd that stu-

dents start dialogs by asking questions about the

beginning of the section before progressing to ask-

ing questions about the end. These observations

imply that models built for must incorporate

the dialog context to achieve good performance.

We present a strong neural baseline (Clark and

Gardner, 2018) that considers both dialog context

and section text. While this model achieves within

6 F1 of human performance on SQuAD, it per-

forms 20 F1 points below the human upper bound

on , indicating room for future improvement.

2 Dataset collection

This section describes our data collection process, which involves facilitating QA dialogs between crowd workers. Table 1 shows shares many of the same positive characteristics of existing QA datasets while expanding upon the dialog aspect.

questions dialogs unique sections
tokens / section tokens / question tokens / answer questions / dialog
% yes/no % unanswerable

Train
83,568 11,567 6,843
396.8 6.5 15.1 7.2 26.4 20.2

Dev.
7,354 1,000 1,000
440.0 6.5 12.3 7.4 22.1 20.2

Test
7,353 1,002 1,002
445.8 6.5 12.3 7.3 23.4 20.1

Overall
98,407 13,594
8,854
401.0 6.5 14.6 7.2 25.8 20.2

Table 2: Statistics summarizing the dataset.

2.1 Interactive Task
Our task pairs up two workers, a teacher and a student, who discuss a section s (e.g., “Origin & History” in the example from Figure 1) from a Wikipedia article about an entity e (Daffy Duck). The student is permitted to see only the section’s title t and the ﬁrst paragraph of the main article b, while the teacher is additionally provided with full access to the section text.
The task begins with the student formulating a free-text question q from the limited information they have been given. The teacher is not allowed to answer with free text; instead, they must select a contiguous span of text deﬁned by indices (i, j) into the section text s.2 While this decision limits the expressivity of answers, it makes evaluation simpler and more reliable; as such, it has been adopted in other reading comprehension datasets such as SQuAD, TriviaQA (Joshi et al., 2017), and NewsQA (Trischler et al., 2016).
To facilitate more natural interactions, teachers must also provide the student with a list of dialog acts v that indicates the presence of any of n discrete statements. We include three types of di-
2We set the maximum answer length to 30 tokens to prevent teachers from revealing the full article all at once.

what
what

What team was he with? What station did it air on?

What other countries if any did he visit?

What type of museum did Peggy plan to open?

What were her troubles in 2016?

What do critics say about them?

What other movies did she do?

what
wwashat was

What was it about? What was the name of the single?

What was Takemitsu's opinion of Debussy?

What was their ﬁrst album?

What was one of his reforms?

What was the driving force behind the name change?

what
dwidhat did

what
iswhat is

What did they try next? What did Doris contribute to? What did they record? What did he do in there? What did she do after college?

What is notable about his player proﬁle? What is Refused’s musical style?

what
hwaphpaetnehdappened

what
ewlsehat else

What happened after that? What happened in 1983?

What else must one do? What else is notable?

did
PRdNid

did PRN

Did the albums do well? Did Huxley teach his beliefs? Did she rise in the company? Did Pamela cheat on Churchill?

Did they have a lot of followers? did Did she go on any tours after this? Did they win against Cuba? Did he marry? Did they serve any prison time? Did he have any conﬂicts with team mates? Did she win an award? Did he actually get a Muslim state started?

how
how

how
How doedsidhe try to
take over the world?

was
was

Was this report helpful?

How was perversion handled? How long was he there? How popular did she become?

Was Villa ever the governor of Chihuahua? Was there another lawsuit?

how did How did Mark Felt contact Woodword?
How did the meeting go? How did it do on the charts?

was
PwRNas PRN

Was it a success?

Was he very mean to these relatives? Was she a happy child?

when when
did

when
when did

where
where

When was she born? When was it founded? When was the breakup?

When did he get started in politics? When did he die?

who
who Who promoted the ﬁlm?
Who was in The Go-Go’s?
Who was their father? Who acquired the rights to the band’s back catalogs? Who was Emily inﬂuenced by?

Where was the club based? Where was she from? Where did Julianne Hough tour?

why
why

Why did he retire?

Why did they meet at Woodside Hotel? Why did he represent her?

Figure 2: A treemap visualization of the eight most frequent “Wh” words in , where box area is proportional to number of occurrences. Compared to other machine comprehension datasets, we observe increased contextuality and open-endedness, as well as a variety of both general and speciﬁc questions.

alog acts: (1) continuation (follow up, maybe follow up, or don’t follow up), (2) afﬁrmation (yes, no, or neither) and (3) answerability (answerable or no answer). The continuation act is crucial for workers to have productive dialogs, as it allows teachers to guide the student’s questioning towards aspects of the article that are especially important or interesting. Altogether, a teacher’s complete answer to a question q includes a pair of indices and dialog indicators, a = (i, j, v). If a question is marked no answer, the indices are ignored.
After receiving an answer from the teacher, the student asks another question. At every turn, the student has more information about the topic than they did previously, which encourages them to ask follow-up questions about what they have just learned. The dialog continues until (1) twelve questions are answered, (2) one of the partners decides to end the interaction, or (3) more than two unanswerable questions were asked.
2.2 Collection Details
We used Amazon Mechanical Turk for collection, restricting the task to workers in English-speaking countries and with more than 1000 HITs with at least a 95% acceptance rate. We paid workers per the number of completed turns in the dialog, which encourages workers to have long dialogs with their partners, and discarded dialogs with less than three

QA pairs.3 To ensure quality, we created a qualiﬁcation task and allowed workers to report their partner for various problems. More details on data collection can be found in our datasheet.4
Article selection Our early pilot studies showed that articles about people generally require less background knowledge to write good questions than other categories. To ﬁnd articles about people with varied backgrounds, we retrieved articles from a list of category keywords (culture, animal, people associated with event, geography, health, celebrity) using a web interface provided by the Wikimedia foundation.5 We pruned by popularity by selecting articles with at least 100 incoming links, and we additionally removed non-person entities using YAGO (Suchanek et al., 2007). After article selection, we ﬁltered sections from these articles based on the number of paragraphs, number of tokens, and average words per sentence. 6
Dataset validation To create our evaluation sets, we collected four additional annotations per question. Workers were presented with questions from a previously collected dialog and asked to
3On average, we paid $0.33 per question, increasing pay per question as dialogs got longer to encourage completion.
4 http://quac.ai/datasheet.pdf 5https://petscan.wmﬂabs.org/ 6These ﬁltering steps bias our data towards entertainers; see datasheet for details.

provide answer spans.7 Acquiring many annotations is important since many questions in have multiple valid answers.
Train / Dev / Test Differences Table 2 shows small differences between training, development and testing splits. Sections in the training set are shorter than those in the evaluation folds because we permit multiple dialogs about the same section only in training; since workers preferred reading shorter sections, these were more likely to result in multiple dialogs. Variations in answer span length arise from two sources: (1) having multiple annotations in the validation task and (2) differing incentives between the data collection and validation procedures.8 An analysis measuring the effect of these variations shows that they result in little difference in evaluation.9

3 Dataset Analysis

differs from other reading comprehension datasets due to our dialog-style collection process and the information asymmetry between teacher and student. In the following sections, we provide a qualitative analysis of the dataset in that highlights challenging question types as well as the impact of the dialog context.

Question and answer types Table 2 shows

dataset summary statistics.

has long an-

swers of 15 tokens on average compared to 3 for

SQuAD, which is unsurprising as most SQuAD

answers are either entities or numerics (Jurczyk

et al., 2018) while

questions can be more

open-ended. While the average question length

(6.5 tokens) is shorter than that of SQuAD (11

tokens), this does not indicate reduced question

complexity, as the student (1) cannot access the

section to paraphrase it and (2) can be more con-

cise by coreferencing previous interactions.

Figure 2 visualizes the most frequent question types in based on “Wh” words.10 For a more

7After submitting an answer, they were shown the original teacher’s answer so that they could understand the context of the subsequent questions.
8Validation workers did not have to maintain the dialog and so did not include as much information in the response.
9More speciﬁcally, we analyze whether references from the initial data collection signiﬁcantly differ from references collected during validation. We observe a difference of less than 1 F1 when using the original answer as system output versus using validation answers.
10To more effectively visualize sub-boxes like “what did”, we exclude questions from the tail of the distribution.

Section: Augusto Pinochet : Intellectual life...
STUDENT: Was he known for being intelligent? TEACHER: → No, Pinochet was publicly known
as a man with a lack of culture. STUDENT: why did people feel that way? TEACHER: → reinforced by the fact that he also
portrayed himself as a common man STUDENT: did he have any hobbies? TEACHER: → Yes, Before wresting power from
Allende, Pinochet had written two books. STUDENT: what is the name of a book written by
him? TEACHER: → Geopolitica (1968) and Campana
de Tarapaca (1972). STUDENT: what were the books about? TEACHER: → Chile’s military literature. STUDENT: was there anything noteworthy re-
garding his books? TEACHER: → Yes, In Geopolitica Pinochet pla-
giarized (...) Gregorio Rodriguez Tascon STUDENT: did he deny those allegations? TEACHER: → No answer STUDENT: what did he plagiarize in Geopolitica? TEACHER: →¯ In Geopolitica Pinochet plagia-
rized (...) paragraphs from a 1949 presentation ...
Figure 3: An example successful dialog from . Questions build on each other and interesting aspects (e.g., plagiarism) are explored as they are discovered.
ﬁne-grained analysis, we randomly sampled 100 questions (each from a different dialog) and manually labeled different phenomena in Table 3. Unlike most current QA datasets that focus on factoid questions, our task setup encourages more open-ended questions: about half of questions are non-factoid. Furthermore, 86% of questions are contextual, requiring reading the context to resolve coreference; of these, 44% refer to entities or events in the dialog history, while 61% refer to the subject of the article.
The role of context Dialog context is crucial to understanding and answering questions. Figure 5a shows that the location of the answer within the text is inﬂuenced by the number of questions asked previously. Early questions are mostly answered in the beginning of the section, while later questions tend to focus on the end of the section. Interestingly, text in the middle of the section is not asked about as frequently (Figure 5c). As more questions get asked, the more likely a question is to be unanswerable.
Figure 5b shows how the answers progress through different chunks of the evidence text (where each section is divided into 12 chunks of

Section: Gaelic Ireland : Invasion
STUDENT: What year did the invasion happen? TEACHER: → in 1169 the main body of Norman,
Welsh and Flemish forces landed in Ireland and quickly retook Leinster and the cities of Waterford and Dublin on behalf of Diarmait. STUDENT: Who was Diarmait? TEACHER: →¯ King Diarmait Mac Murchada of Leinster. STUDENT: Where is Leinster located? TEACHER: → landed in Ireland and quickly retook Leinster. STUDENT: Were invasions common? TEACHER: → No answer STUDENT: Are there any other interesting aspects about this article? TEACHER: →¯ Yes, IPope Adrian IV, the only English pope, had already issued a Papal Bull in 1155 giving Henry II of England authority to invade Ireland. STUDENT: Who lead the invasion? TEACHER: → No answer STUDENT: Did England defeat the Irish armies? TEACHER: → No answer
Figure 4: A less successful dialog from . The student struggles to get information despite asking good questions. The teacher attempts to provide extra context to guide the student, but the dialog ultimately ends because of too many unanswerable questions.
equal size). The answer to the next question is most frequently either in the same chunk as the previous question or an adjacent chunk, and most dialogs in the dataset cover three to six of the chunks (Figure 5d). These observations suggest that models for must take into account the dialog context. However, results in Section 5 show that solely relying on the location of previous answers is not sufﬁcient.
Finally, we examine properties of the questions as a function of the turn position in the dialog (Figure 6). The frequency of yes/no questions increases signiﬁcantly as the dialogs progress; again, at the beginning of the dialog, students have very little information, so it is harder to formulate a yes/no question. The percentage of questions that have multiple answers declines as the dialog progresses, implying students ask general questions ﬁrst and speciﬁc ones later.
Qualitative examples Figures 3 and 4 contain two representative dialogs from . Longer dialogs sometimes switch topics (such as in Figure 3 about “academic work”) and often go from general to speciﬁc questions. Students whose ques-

Question type Nonfactoid Contextual
Coref (article)
Coref (history)
Anything else?

% Example
54 Q: Were the peace talks a success? Q: What was her childhood like?
86 61 Title: Paul Ce´zanne: Early years
Q: When did he start painting? Q: What was special about the Harrah’s? 44 A: project was built by Trump with ﬁnancing from the Holiday Corporation. Q: Which led to what? 11 Q: What other acting did he do? Q: What else did he research?

Table 3: An analysis of questions. Non-factoid questions do not ask about speciﬁc facts, while contextual questions require reading the history to resolve coreferences to the dialog history and/or article.

tions go unanswered commonly resort to asking their teacher for any interesting content; even if this strategy fails to prolong the dialog as in Figure 4, models can still use the dialog to learn when to give no answer.
4 Experimental Setup
We consider the following QA task: given the ﬁrst k questions and k ground-truth answers in the dialog, all supporting material (entity e, topic t, background b, and section text s), and question qk+1, we predict the answer span indices i, j in the section text s. Since afﬁrmation questions are incomplete without a yes/no answer and the continuation feedback is important for information-seeking dialog, we predict the dialog acts v, which with the span form the ﬁnal answer prediction ak+1.
All of our experiments are carried out on a train/dev/test split of 83.5k/7.3k/7.3k questions/answer pairs, where no sections are shared between the different folds. Questions in the training set have one reference answer, while dev and test questions have ﬁve references each. For all experiments, we do not evaluate on questions with a human F1 lower than 40, which eliminates roughly 10% of our noisiest annotations.11
4.1 Evaluation Metrics
Our core evaluation metric, word-level F1, is implemented similarly to SQuAD (Rajpurkar et al.,
11A manual inspection of annotations below this threshold revealed many lower quality questions; however, we also report unthresholded F1 in the ﬁnal column of Table 4.

(a) Answer location by position in dialog

(b) Location of next answer given current answer

Current answer chunk

Turn number

Occurrence frequency

Answer chunk

Next answer chunk

(c) % dialogs that visit nth answer chunk

(d) # unique answer chunks visited per dialog

Figure 5: Heatmaps depicting the importance of context in dialogs, where (a) and (b) share the same color scale. The student’s earlier questions are answered mostly by the ﬁrst few chunks, while the end of the section is covered in later turns (a). The middle is the least covered portion (c), and dialogs cover around ﬁve unique chunks of the section on average (d). The transition matrix (b) shows that the answer to the next question is more likely to be located within a chunk adjacent to the current answer than in one farther away.

Turn number
Figure 6: The number of turns in the dialog inﬂuences the student’s behavior: they start by asking general questions (i.e., easier to answer, with multiple possible answers) and progress to more speciﬁc ones.
2016): precision and recall are computed by considering the portion of words in the prediction and references that overlap after removing stopwords.12 For no answer questions, we give the system an F1 of one if it correctly predicts no answer and zero otherwise.13 Like SQuAD, we compute the maximum F1 among all references; however, since many questions have multiple valid answers, this metric varies signiﬁcantly with
12Since our answer spans have vaguer boundaries than the shorter ones in SQuAD, exact match is not a useful metric.
13Because the validation task was more susceptible to spam by constant annotation of “no-answer,” we only allow “no-answer” if the majority of references marked “noanswer”, removing other answers. If “no-answer” is not the majority answer, we remove all instances of “no-answer”.

the number of reference annotations. To make oracle human and system performance comparable, given n references, we report the average of the maximum F1 computed from each n − 1 subset with respect to the heldout reference.
Additionally, since averaged F1 can be misleading for questions with multiple valid answers, we introduce the human equivalence score (HEQ), a performance measure for judging whether a system’s output is as good as that of an average human.14 HEQ measures the percentage of examples for which system F1 exceeds or matches human F1. We compute two variants: (1) the percentage of questions for which this is true (HEQ-Q), and (2) the percentage of dialogs for which this is true for every question in the dialog (HEQ-D). A system that achieves a value of 100 on HEQ-D can by deﬁnition maintain average human quality output over full dialogs.
For dialog acts, we report accuracy with respect to the majority annotation, breaking ties randomly.
5 Experiments
5.1 Sanity checks
Random sentence This baseline selects a random sentence in the section text s as the answer (including no answer).
14In cases with lower human agreement on F1, if a system produces one reference exactly (F1 = 100), it will get points that it can use to offset poor performance on other examples.

Majority The majority answer outputs no answer and the majority class for all other dialog acts (neither for afﬁrmation and don’t follow up for continuation).

Transition matrix We divide the supporting text into 12 chunks (with a special chunk for no answer) and use the transition matrix (computed from the training set) in Figure 5b to select an answer given the position of the previous answer. This baseline does not output other dialog acts.

5.2 Upper bounds
Gold NA + TM This is the same transition matrix (TM) baseline as before, except that for questions whose gold annotations are no answer, we always output no answer.

Gold sentence + NA To see if

can be

treated as an answer sentence selection problem,

we output the sentence from s with the maximal

F1 with respect to references, or no answer for

unanswerable questions.

Human performance We pick one reference as a system output and compute the F1 with respect to the remaining references using the method described in Section 4.1. By deﬁnition, all HEQ measures are 100, and we report agreement for the afﬁrmation dialog act.15

5.3 Baselines
Pretrained InferSent To test the importance of lexical matching in our dataset, we output the sentence in s whose pretrained InferSent representation (Conneau et al., 2017) has the highest cosine similarity to that of the question.

Feature-rich logistic regression We train a logistic regression using Vowpal Wabbit (Langford et al., 2007) to select answer sentences. We use simple matching features (e.g., n-gram overlap between questions and candidate answers), bias features (position and length of a candidate), and contextual features (e.g., matching features computed with previous questions / answers, turn number).

BiDAF++ We use a re-implementation of a topperforming SQuAD model (Peters et al., 2018) that augments bidirectional attention ﬂow (Seo
15We did not collect multiple annotations for the continuation dialog act and so omit it.

et al., 2016, BiDAF) with self-attention (Clark and Gardner, 2018) and contextualized embeddings.16
A token for no answer is appended to s to enable its prediction following Levy et al. (2017). Additionally, we modify the model for our task to also predict dialog acts, placing a classiﬁer over the same representation used to predict the end position of the predicted span.
BiDAF++ w/ k-ctx As BiDAF++ does not model any dialog context, we modify the passage and question embedding processes to consider the dialog history. We consider context from the previous k QA pairs.17
• Passage embedding We explicitly identify the previous k answers within the section text by concatenating marker embeddings to the existing word embeddings.
• Question embedding Naively prepending the previous k questions to the current question did not show gains in initial experiments. We opt instead to simply encode the dialog turn number within the question embedding.
5.4 Results
Table 4 summarizes our results (each cell displays dev/test scores), where dialog acts are Yes/No (afﬁrmation) and Follow up (continuation). For comparison to other datasets, we report F1 without ﬁltering low-agreement QA pairs (F1’).
Sanity check Overall, the poor sanity check results imply that is very challenging. Of these, following the transition matrix (TM) gives the best performance, reinforcing the observation that the dialog context plays a signiﬁcant role in the task.
Upper bounds The human upper bound (80.8 F1) demonstrates high agreement. While Gold sentence + NA does perform well, indicating that signiﬁcant progress can be made by treating the problem as answer sentence selection, HEQ measures show that span-based approaches will be needed achieve average human equivalence. Finally, the Gold NA + TM shows that cannot be solved by ignoring question and answer text.
16The AllenNLP (Gardner et al., 2017) implementation we use reaches 82.7 on the SQuAD development set, compared to the paper’s reported 85.8 on SQuAD; regardless, this implementation would have been state-of-the-art less than a year ago, making it an extremely strong baseline.
17Our implementation is available in AllenNLP.

Random sentence Majority answer Trans. matrix (TM)
Pretrained InferSent Logistic regression BiDAF++ (no ctx) BiDAF++ (w/ 1-ctx) BiDAF++ (w/ 2-ctx) BiDAF++ (w/ 3-ctx)
Gold NA + TM Gold sentence + NA Human performance

F1
15.7 / 15.6 22.7 / 22.5 31.8 / 31.5
21.4 / 20.8 34.3 / 33.9 51.8 / 50.2 59.9 / 59.0 60.6 / 60.1 60.6 / 59.5
43.0 / 42.6 72.4 / 72.7 80.8 / 81.1

HEQ-Q
6.9 / 6.9 22.7 / 22.5 15.8 / 15.8
10.2 / 10.0 22.4 / 22.2 45.3 / 43.3 54.9 / 53.6 55.7 / 54.8 55.6 / 54.5
27.4 / 27.4 61.8 / 62.7 100 / 100

HEQ-D
0.0 / 0.1 0.5 / 0.4 0.1 / 0.2
0.0 / 0.0 0.6 / 0.2 2.0 / 2.2 4.7 / 3.4 5.3 / 4.0 5.0 / 4.1
1.0 / 0.8 9.8 / 9.7 100 / 100

Yes / No
— 78.8 / 77.6
—
— — 86.4 / 85.4 86.5 / 86.1 86.6 / 85.7 86.1 / 85.7
— — 89.4 / 89.0

Follow up
— 57.9 / 56.7
—
— — 59.7 / 59.0 61.3 / 60.3 61.6 / 61.3 61.6 / 61.2
— — —

F1 (All)
16.4 / 16.3 20.2 / 20.0 31.2 / 30.9
22.0 / 21.4 34.3 / 33.8 50.1 / 48.2 57.5 / 56.5 58.3 / 57.8 58.1 / 57.0
41.0 / 40.6 70.8 / 71.2 74.6 / 74.7

Table 4: Experimental results of sanity checks (top), baselines (middle) and upper bounds (bottom) on . Simple text matching baselines perform poorly, while models that incorporate the dialog context signiﬁcantly outperform those that do not. Humans outperform our best model by a large margin, indicating room for future improvement.

Baselines Text similarity methods such as bagof-ngrams overlap and InferSent are largely ineffective on , which shows that questions have little direct overlap with their answers. On the other hand, BiDAF++ models make signiﬁcant progress, demonstrating that existing models can already capture a signiﬁcant portion of phenomena in . The addition of information from previous turns (w/ 1-ctx) helps signiﬁcantly, indicating that integration of context is essential to solving the task. While increasing the context size in BiDAF++ continues to help, we observe saturation using contexts of length 3, suggesting that more sophisticated models are necessary to take full advantage of the context. Finally, even our best model underperforms humans: the system achieves human equivalence on only 60% of questions and 5% of full dialogs.
5.5 Error Analysis
In this section, we analyze the development set performance of our best context-aware model (BiDAF++ w/ 2-ctx), our best context-agnostic model (BiDAF++), and humans. Figure 7 contains three plots showing how F1 scores of baseline models and human agreement vary with (1) turn number, (2) distance from previous answer,18 and (3) answer length in tokens. Taken as a whole, our analysis reveals signiﬁcant qualitative differences between our context-aware and context-agnostic models beyond simply F1; additionally, human
18We divide the text into 12 equally-sized chunks and compute the difference of the current and previous chunk indices.

behavior differs from that of both models.
In the ﬁrst plot, human agreement is unchanged throughout the dialog while the performance of both models decreases as the number of turns increases, although the context-aware model degrades less. While continuing a dialog for more turns does not affect human agreement, the second plot shows that human disagreement increases as the distance between the current answer’s location within the section text and that of the previous answer increases. Larger distances indicate shifts in the student’s line of questioning (e.g., if the teacher told the student not to follow up on the previous question). The plot also shows that model performance suffers (signiﬁcantly more than humans) as distance increases, although the contextaware model can tolerate smaller shifts better than the context-agnostic model. In the last plot, human agreement is higher when the answer span is short; in contrast, our model struggles to pin down short answers compared to longer ones.
The plots demonstrate the increased robustness of the context-aware model compared to BiDAF++. This ﬁnding is reinforced by examining the difference in model performance on questions where previously the teacher recommended the student to “follow up” vs. not to follow up. The context-aware baseline performs 6 HEQ-Q higher on the “follow up” questions; in contrast, the context-agnostic baseline shows no HEQ-Q difference between the two types of questions. This discrepancy stems from the context-agnostic

Figure 7: The F1 scores of baseline models and human agreements based on dialog turn number, answer’s distance from previous answer, and the answer span token length.

model’s inability to take advantage of the location of the previous answer.
6 Related Work
Reading Comprehension Our work builds on span based reading comprehension (Rajpurkar et al., 2016; Joshi et al., 2017; Trischler et al., 2016), while also incorporating innovations such as curating questions independently of supporting text to reduce trivial lexical overlap (Joshi et al., 2017; Kocisky´ et al., 2017) and allowing for unanswerable questions (Trischler et al., 2016; Rajpurkar et al., 2018). We handle open-ended questions like in MSMARCO (Nguyen et al., 2016), with multiple references, but we are the ﬁrst to incorporate these into information-seeking dialog.
Sequential QA Our work is similar to sequential question answering against knowledge bases (Iyyer et al., 2017) and the web (Talmor and Berant, 2018), but instead of decomposing a single question into smaller questions, we rely on the curiosity of the student to generate a sequence of questions. Such open information seeking was studied in semantic parsing on knowledge bases (Dahl et al., 1994) and more recently with modern approaches (Saha et al., 2018), but with questions paraphrased from templates. Concurrent to our work, Saeidi et al. (2018) proposed a task of generating and answering yes/no questions for rule focused text (such as trafﬁc laws) by interacting with a user through dialog. Also concurrently, Reddy et al. (2018) propose conversational question answering (CoQA) from text but allow both students and questioners to see the evidence. As a result, a large percentage of CoQA answers are named entities or short noun phrases, much like those in SQuAD. In contrast, the asymmetric nature of forces students to ask more

exploratory questions whose answers can be potentially be followed up on.19

Dialog

ﬁts into an increasing interest in

open domain dialog, mostly studied in the con-

text of social chit-chat (Li et al., 2016; Ritter

et al., 2011; Fang et al., 2017; Ghazvininejad et al.,

2018). Most related to our effort is visual dia-

log (Das et al., 2017), which relies on images as

evidence instead of text. More explicit goal driven

scenarios, such as bargaining (Lewis et al., 2017)

and item guessing (He et al., 2017) have also been

explored, but the language is more constrained

than in . Information-seeking dialog specif-

ically was studied in Stede and Schlangen (2004).

7 Conclusion

In this paper, we introduce , a large scale dataset of information-seeking dialogs over sections from Wikipedia articles. Our data collection process, which takes the form of a teacher-student interaction between two crowd workers, encourages questions that are highly contextual, openended, and even unanswerable from the text. Our baselines, which include top performers on existing machine comprehension datasets, signiﬁcantly underperform humans on . We hope this discrepancy will spur the development of machines that can more effectively participate in information seeking dialog.

Acknowledgments

was jointly funded by the Allen Institute for Artiﬁcial Intelligence and the DARPA CwC program through ARO (W911NF-15-1-0543). We would like to thank anonymous reviewers and Hsin-Yuan Huang who helped improve the draft.

19On average, CoQA answers are 2.7 tokens long, while

SQuAD’s are 3.2 tokens and

’s are over 14 tokens.

References
Christopher Clark and Matt Gardner. 2018. Simple and effective multi-paragraph reading comprehension. Proceedings of the Association for Computational Linguistics.
Alexis Conneau, Douwe Kiela, Holger Schwenk, Loic Barrault, and Antoine Bordes. 2017. Supervised learning of universal sentence representations from natural language inference data. In Proceedings of Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing.
Deborah A. Dahl, Madeleine Bates, Michael Brown, William M. Fisher, Kate Hunicke-Smith, David S. Pallett, Christine Pao, Alexander I. Rudnicky, and Elizabeth Shriberg. 1994. Expanding the scope of the atis task: The atis-3 corpus. In Proceedings of the workshop on Human Language Technology.
Abhishek Das, Satwik Kottur, Khushi Gupta, Avi Singh, Deshraj Yadav, Jose´ MF Moura, Devi Parikh, and Dhruv Batra. 2017. Visual dialog. In Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition.
Hao Fang, Hao Cheng, Elizabeth Clark, Ariel Holtzman, Maarten Sap, Mari Ostendorf, Yejin Choi, and Noah A Smith. 2017. Sounding board–university of washingtons alexa prize submission. Alexa Prize Proceedings.
Matt Gardner, Joel Grus, Mark Neumann, Oyvind Tafjord, Pradeep Dasigi, Nelson F. Liu, Matthew Peters, Michael Schmitz, and Luke S. Zettlemoyer. 2017. Allennlp: A deep semantic natural language processing platform.
Marjan Ghazvininejad, Chris Brockett, Ming-Wei Chang, Bill Dolan, Jianfeng Gao, Wen-tau Yih, and Michel Galley. 2018. A knowledge-grounded neural conversation model. Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial Intelligence.
He He, Anusha Balakrishnan, Mihail Eric, and Percy Liang. 2017. Learning symmetric collaborative dialogue agents with dynamic knowledge graph embeddings. Proceedings of the Association for Computational Linguistics.
Mohit Iyyer, Wen tau Yih, and Ming-Wei Chang. 2017. Search-based neural structured learning for sequential question answering. In Proceedings of the Association for Computational Linguistics.
Mandar Joshi, Eunsol Choi, Daniel S. Weld, and Luke Zettlemoyer. 2017. Triviaqa: A large scale distantly supervised challenge dataset for reading comprehension. In Proceedings of the Association for Computational Linguistics.
Tomasz Jurczyk, Amit Deshmane, and Jinho D. Choi. 2018. Analysis of wikipedia-based corpora for question answering. arXiv preprint arXiv:abs/1801.02073.

Toma´s Kocisky´, Jonathan Schwarz, Phil Blunsom, Chris Dyer, Karl Moritz Hermann, Ga´bor Melis, and Edward Grefenstette. 2017. The narrativeqa reading comprehension challenge. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, abs/1712.07040.
John Langford, Lihong Li, and Alex Strehl. 2007. Vowpal wabbit online learning project.
Omer Levy, Minjoon Seo, Eunsol Choi, and Luke S. Zettlemoyer. 2017. Zero-shot relation extraction via reading comprehension. In Conference on Computational Natural Language Learning.
Mike Lewis, Denis Yarats, Yann N Dauphin, Devi Parikh, and Dhruv Batra. 2017. Deal or no deal? end-to-end learning for negotiation dialogues. Proceedings of Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing.
Jiwei Li, Will Monroe, Alan Ritter, Michel Galley, Jianfeng Gao, and Dan Jurafsky. 2016. Deep reinforcement learning for dialogue generation. Proceedings of Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing.
Tri Nguyen, Mir Rosenberg, Xia Song, Jianfeng Gao, Saurabh Tiwary, Rangan Majumder, and Li Deng. 2016. Ms marco: A human generated machine reading comprehension dataset. arXiv, abs/1611.09268.
Matthew E Peters, Mark Neumann, Mohit Iyyer, Matt Gardner, Christopher Clark, Kenton Lee, and Luke Zettlemoyer. 2018. Deep contextualized word representations. Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics.
Pranav Rajpurkar, Robin Jia, and Percy Liang. 2018. Know what you don’t know: Unanswerable questions for squad. In Proceedings of the Association for Computational Linguistics.
Pranav Rajpurkar, Jian Zhang, Konstantin Lopyrev, and Percy Liang. 2016. Squad: 100,000+ questions for machine comprehension of text. In Proceedings of Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing.
Siva Reddy, Danqi Chen, and Christopher D. Manning. 2018. Coqa: A conversational question answering challenge. ArXiv.
Alan Ritter, Colin Cherry, and William B. Dolan. 2011. Data-driven response generation in social media. In Proceedings of Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing.
Marzieh Saeidi, Max Bartolo, Patrick Lewis, Sameer Signh, Tim Rocktschel, Mike Sheldon, Guillaume Bouchard, and Sebastian Riedel. 2018. Interpretation of natural language rules in conversational machine reading. In Proceedings of Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing.

Amrita Saha, Vardaan Pahuja, Mitesh M Khapra, Karthik Sankaranarayanan, and Sarath Chandar. 2018. Complex sequential question answering: Towards learning to converse over linked question answer pairs with a knowledge graph. In Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial Intelligence.
Minjoon Seo, Aniruddha Kembhavi, Ali Farhadi, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. 2016. Bidirectional attention ﬂow for machine comprehension. Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations.
Manfred Stede and David Schlangen. 2004. Information-seeking chat: Dialogues driven by topic-structure. In Eighth workshop on the semantics and pragmatics of dialogue; SemDial.
Fabian M. Suchanek, Gjergji Kasneci, and Gerhard Weikum. 2007. Yago: a core of semantic knowledge. In Proceedings of the World Wide Web Conference.
A. Talmor and J. Berant. 2018. The web as knowledgebase for answering complex questions. In Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics.
Adam Trischler, Tong Wang, Xingdi Yuan, Justin Harris, Alessandro Sordoni, Philip Bachman, and Kaheer Suleman. 2016. Newsqa: A machine comprehension dataset. arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.09830.

