DEEP PERFORMER: SCORE-TO-AUDIO MUSIC PERFORMANCE SYNTHESIS

Hao-Wen Dong 1,2 ∗ Cong Zhou 1 1 Dolby Laboratories

Taylor Berg-Kirkpatrick 2 Julian McAuley 2 2 University of California San Diego

arXiv:2202.06034v2 [cs.SD] 21 Feb 2022

ABSTRACT
Music performance synthesis aims to synthesize a musical score into a natural performance. In this paper, we borrow recent advances in text-to-speech synthesis and present the Deep Performer—a novel system for score-to-audio music performance synthesis. Unlike speech, music often contains polyphony and long notes. Hence, we propose two new techniques for handling polyphonic inputs and providing a ﬁne-grained conditioning in a transformer encoder-decoder model. To train our proposed system, we present a new violin dataset consisting of paired recordings and scores along with estimated alignments between them. We show that our proposed model can synthesize music with clear polyphony and harmonic structures. In a listening test, we achieve competitive quality against the baseline model, a conditional generative audio model, in terms of pitch accuracy, timbre and noise level. Moreover, our proposed model signiﬁcantly outperforms the baseline on an existing piano dataset in overall quality.
Index Terms— Audio synthesis, computer music, music information retrieval, machine learning, neural network
1. INTRODUCTION
Music synthesis is a complex process that involves both the physics behind a musical instrument and the art of music performance. It remains challenging for a machine to synthesize a natural performance for several reasons. First, it requires a computational model for interpreting and phrasing a musical score. Second, it requires either an explicit or implicit model of the physics and acoustics by which a musical instrument sounds. Third, it requires an understanding of diﬀerent playing techniques and styles for a musical instrument. While most existing systems only address one of these three challenges at a time, we aim to tackle all these challenges with a data-driven approach using machine learning in this work. We present the Deep Performer—a novel three-stage system for score-to-audio music synthesis, as illustrated in Fig. 1.
Prior work has studied music synthesis via various approaches. One line of research focuses on generating realistic samples of musical notes [1–3], while in this work we aim to generate the full performance. Some approach music synthesis by conditioning generative audio models with aligned piano rolls [4, 5], which we will include as the baseline model in
∗Work done during an internship at Dolby. Contact: hwdong@ucsd.edu

Fig. 1: An overview of the proposed three-stage pipeline for score-to-audio music performance synthesis.
our experiments. Others study synthesizing audio from the fundamental frequency (F0) contour and loudness curve extracted from a recording [6,7], or from lyrics and demo singing audio [8]. On the other hand, some use neural networks to generate expressive timing and dynamics from raw scores [9]. Many have also studied inverting mel spectrograms back to waveforms [10–13], including Hiﬁ-GAN [13], which we will use as the inversion model in our proposed system. To the best of our knowledge, prior work on deep neural network based music synthesis either requires an input with expressive timing [4–8, 14–16] or allows only monophonic (i.e., one pitch at a time) inputs [6, 8, 17]. Our proposed system represents the ﬁrst that allows unaligned, polyphonic scores as inputs.
In light of the similarity between text-to-speech (TTS) and score-to-audio synthesis, we borrow recent advances from TTS synthesis [18] to music synthesis and propose a threestage system for score-to-audio music synthesis. Despite the similarity, music synthesis diﬀers from speech synthesis in that music often contains polyphony, and that long notes are common in music. In order to handle polyphonic music, we propose a new polyphonic mixer for aligning the encoder and decoder in a transformer encoder-decoder network [19,20]. To provide a ﬁne-grained conditioning to the model, we propose a new note-wise positional encoding so that the model can learn to behave diﬀerently at the beginning, middle and end of a note. Due to the lack of a proper dataset for training a score-to-audio music synthesis model, we collect and release a new dataset of 6.5 hours of high-quality violin recordings along with their scores and estimated alignments. Through our experiments, we show the eﬀectiveness of our proposed system both qualitatively and quantitatively. Finally, we conduct a

subjective listening test to compare our proposed model against a baseline model that uses Hiﬁ-GAN [13] to synthesize the waveform directly from an aligned piano roll. Audio samples can be found on our project website.1

2. METHODS
We illustrate in Fig. 1 the proposed three-stage system for score-to-audio music synthesis, which consists of the following three components: (1) an alignment model that predicts the expressive timing for each note from a musical score, (2) a synthesis model that synthesizes the mel spectrogram from the aligned score, and (3) an inversion model that generates the audio waveform given the synthesized mel spectrogram.

2.1. Alignment model
The alignment model consists of a transformer encoder that takes as inputs a sequence of notes and the tempo, followed by a fully-connected layer that outputs the onset and duration of each note. The input score uses metric time with a musicallymeaningful unit, e.g., quarter notes, while the output alignment is in the unit of frames. Each note is speciﬁed by its pitch, onset, duration and (optional) velocity. In addition, we provide the performer IDs so that the model can learn the diﬀerent playing styles of performers. The alignment model is trained to minimize the mean squared error (MSE) between the ground truth and predicted onsets and durations, in frames.
2.2. Synthesis model
Given the similarity between TTS and score-to-audio synthesis, we propose a transformer encoder-decoder model for our synthesis model based on [21]. In [21], each text embedding produced by the encoder is expanded multiple times according to its duration, and then the expanded text embeddings are concatenated to obtain the frame embeddings to be fed to the decoder. This is called the state expansion mechanism [21, 22]. However, unlike speech, music often contains polyphony. In order to handle polyphonic inputs, we propose the polyphonic mixer. As illustrated in Fig. 2, the encoder ﬁrst encodes the input notes into a sequence of note embeddings. Then, the polyphonic mixer mixes the note embeddings into a sequence of frame embeddings by summing up the note embeddings for the same frame according to their onsets and durations. Finally, the decoder decodes the frame embeddings into a sequence of mel spectrogram frames.
In the state expansion mechanism [21, 22], the output vectors remain constant for the duration of a note, and the positional information within each note is missing. However, we argue that such note-wise positional information is critical for the model to behave diﬀerently at the beginning, middle and end of a note. Hence, we propose the note-wise positional
1https://salu133445.github.io/deepperformer/

Fig. 2: An illustration of the proposed synthesis model.
encoding to provide a ﬁne-grained conditioning to the decoder. Mathematically, let 𝑝 ∈ [0, 1] be the relative position within a note. For a note embedding vnote, we have the corresponding frame embedding at position 𝑝 as vframe = (1 + 𝑝w) vnote, where w is a learnable vector initialized to small random numbers so that vframe ≈ vnote initially. The synthesis model is trained to minimize the MSE between the synthesized mel spectrograms and the ground truth, in log scale.
2.3. Inversion model
Prior work has studied various approaches for synthesizing waveforms from mel spectrograms [10–13]. In this work, we adopt the state-of-the-art Hiﬁ-GAN model [13] as our inversion model. We note that the proposed three-stage pipeline allows us to use diﬀerent datasets for training the models. For example, training the inversion model does not require aligned data and thus it can be trained on a larger dataset as unaligned data are relatively easier to acquire.
3. DATA
Due to the lack of a dataset that provides paired audios and scores with ﬁne alignments for training our proposed system, we compile a new dataset of 6.5 hours of professional violin recordings along with their scores and estimated alignments. For copyright concern, we choose Bach’s sonatas and partitas for solo violin (BWV 1001–1006) for the ease to acquire high-

2

Fig. 3: An example of the constant-Q spectrogram of the ﬁrst 20 seconds of a violin recording and the estimated onsets (white dots) and durations (green lines).

(a) (b)
(c)
Fig. 4: Examples of the alignments predicted by (a) the constant-tempo baseline model and (b) Deep Performer, our proposed model. (c) shows the input score.

quality public recordings from the web. The dataset consists of performances by 17 violinists recorded in various recording setups. To acquire the alignment between a recording and its score, we synthesize the scores using FluidSynth [23], an open-source software synthesizer, with MuseScore General SoundFont [24] and perform dynamic time warping on the constant-Q spectrogram of the synthesized audio and that of the recording. We present in Fig. 3 an example of the dataset and its estimated alignment. To facilitate future research on scoreto-audio music synthesis, we release the dataset and the source code for the alignment process to the public.2 As discussed in Section 2.3, the inversion model does not require aligned data for training, and thus we also collect an internal dataset of 156 hours of commercial recordings to train the inversion model. Apart from violin, we also consider the MAESTRO dataset [5], which contains 200 hours of piano recordings with ﬁnely-aligned MIDI recordings for 10 competition years of the International Piano-e-Competition [25]. However, since it does not provide the raw scores, we can only train the synthesis and inversion models on this dataset.
4. EXPERIMENTS & RESULTS
4.1. Implementation details
We use 3 transformer layers in the encoder for the alignment model. The synthesis model shares the same encoder architecture as the alignment model and has 6 transformer layers in the decoder. We use 128 dimensions for all embeddings. For the inversion model, we use the same network architecture as the Hiﬁ-GAN v2 model in [13]. We use velocity information only for the piano dataset as it is only available in this dataset. Since performer information is unavailable for the piano dataset, we use the competition years as the performer IDs. We use a temporal resolution of 24 time steps per quarter note for the scores. We downsample the audios to 16 kHz mono and use a hop size of 256 in spectrogram computation, i.e., a temporal resolution of 16 ms. The audios are sliced into 5-second clips for training, where 10% of them are reserved for validation purpose. We use the Adam optimizer [26] with a batch size of 16. Unlike [21], we train the alignment and synthesis models separately as we ﬁnd that joint training hinders convergence. We train the alignment model for 10K steps and all the synthesis models for 100K (violin) and 250K (piano) steps. For each
2https://salu133445.github.io/bach-violin-dataset/

(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Fig. 5: Examples of the mel spectrograms, in log scale, synthesized by our proposed model for (a) violin and (c) piano. (b) and (d) show the input scores for (a) and (c), respectively.
dataset, the inversion model is trained for 1M steps and shared by diﬀerent synthesis models. We base our implementation on the code kindly released in [13, 27]. We use pretty_midi [28] and MusPy [29] to process the scores.
4.2. Qualitative and quantitative results
We show in Fig. 4 an example of the alignment predicted by our proposed alignment model alongside that generated by assuming a constant tempo. We can see that our proposed model is able to predict realistic timing and insert rests between notes. To showcase the eﬀectiveness of the proposed polyphonic mixer, we present in Fig. 5 examples of the synthesized mel spectrograms for two polyphonic scores, where we can observe clear harmonic structures and polyphony.
Next, we compare our proposed synthesis model against a baseline model that uses a Hiﬁ-GAN [13] to synthesize the waveform directly from an aligned piano roll. For a fair comparison, we condition this model with the performer IDs and provide a position roll that encodes the note-wise position information. (A position roll is similar to a piano roll, but the values decrease linearly from 1 to 0, from the beginning of a note to its end.) As can be seen from Fig. 6(a) and (b), our proposed model produces smoother contours and clearer harmonic structures, especially on the high frequency end, while the baseline model generates sharper yet noisier results. Table 2 shows the ﬁnal MSE between the synthesized mel spectrograms and the ground truths. We can see that our proposed model achieves a lower MSE than the baseline model on both datasets. Finally, due to the reduced temporal resolution of a mel spectrogram compared to that of a waveform, our proposed model is faster in training than the baseline model. Audio samples can be found on our project website.1

3

Table 1: Results of the subjective listening test. The mean opinion scores (MOS) and 95% conﬁdence intervals are reported.

Hiﬁ-GAN baseline Deep Performer (ours)
- without note-wise positional encoding - without performer embedding - without encoder (using piano roll input)

Violin
Pitch accuracy
4.02 ± 0.31 4.22 ± 0.30 4.13 ± 0.29 3.05 ± 0.52 4.30 ± 0.36

Timbre
3.13 ± 0.26 3.26 ± 0.30 3.24 ± 0.27 2.54 ± 0.42 2.91 ± 0.28

Noise level
2.51 ± 0.29 2.67 ± 0.31 2.52 ± 0.29 2.04 ± 0.31 2.39 ± 0.28

Overall
2.57 ± 0.22 2.58 ± 0.21 2.61 ± 0.23 2.01 ± 0.25 2.22 ± 0.18

Piano
Overall
1.49 ± 0.17 2.17 ± 0.24 2.37 ± 0.23 2.26 ± 0.25 1.43 ± 0.16

Table 2: Comparisons of the ﬁnal MSE between the synthesized mel spectrograms and the ground truths, in log scales.

Hiﬁ-GAN baseline Deep Performer (ours)
- without note-wise positional encoding - without performer embedding - without encoder (using piano roll input)

Violin
0.892 0.700 0.700 1.030 0.844

Piano
0.722 0.436 0.433 0.523 0.621

(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e) (f) Fig. 6: Examples of the mel spectrograms, in log scale, synthesized by (a) the baseline model, (b) our proposed synthesis model, and (d) our proposed synthesis model without the notewise positional encoding. (c) and (e) show the waveforms for (b) and (d), respectively. (f) shows the input score.
4.3. Subjective listening test
To further evaluate our proposed system, we conduct a subjective listening test with 15 participants recruited from our social networks, where 14 of them plays a musical instrument. We randomly choose 5 musical scores from each dataset and synthesize them with diﬀerent models. The participants are instructed to rate the synthesized audios in a 5-point Likert scale in terms of pitch accuracy, timbre and noise level as well as the overall quality. We report the results in Table 1. We can see that our proposed model signiﬁcantly outperforms the baseline model on the piano dataset and achieves comparable performance to the baseline on the violin dataset.

4.4. Ablation study
To measure the contributions of diﬀerent components of the proposed model, we consider three ablated versions of our model. The ﬁrst removes the note-wise positional encoding. The second removes the performer embedding. The third removes the encoder and uses piano rolls and position rolls (see Section 4.2) as the inputs to the decoder, while keeping the performer embedding. As we can see from Fig. 6(b)– (e), note-wise positional encoding help the model produce clearer note transitions and a more realistic waveform envelope (see the highlighted regions). We also report in Tables 1 and 2 the results for these ablated models. We can see that the performer embedding signiﬁcantly improves the quality across all criteria. While we show above the eﬀectiveness of the note-wise positional encoding, its impact does not reach statistical signiﬁcance in our subjective listening test, possibly overshadowed by the artifacts produced by the models. Finally, including an encoder network improves the quality signiﬁcantly, suggesting that the encoder can learn a more eﬀective representation of the score as compared to the piano roll representation.
5. CONCLUSION
We presented a novel three-stage system for sythesizing natural music performance from unaligned musical scores. We proposed the polyphonic mixer for aligning the encoder and decoder with polyphonic inputs. In addition, we also proposed the note-wise positional encoding for providing a ﬁned-grained conditioning to the synthesis model. Through the subjective listening test, we show that our proposed model signiﬁcantly outperforms the baseline model on the piano dataset and achieves competitive quality against the baseline on the violin dataset. For future work, we plan to utilize the articulation marks and ornaments on scores to better model playing techniques [30, 31], disentangle the timbre from room acoustics to enhance controllability [6], and incorporate adversarial losses [32, 33] to improve the sharpness of the results.
6. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank Joan Serrà, Jordi Pons and Lars Villemoes for helpful reviews and discussions.

4

7. REFERENCES
[1] J. Engel, C. Resnick, A. Roberts, S. Dieleman, D. Eck, K. Simonyan, and M. Norouzi, “Neural audio synthesis of musical notes with WaveNet autoencoders,” in ICML, 2017.
[2] A. Défossez, N. Zeghidour, N. Usunier, L. Bottou, and F. Bach, “SING: Symbol-to-instrument neural generator,” in NeurIPS, 2018.
[3] J. Engel, K. K. Agrawal, S. Chen, I. Gulrajani, C. Donahue, and A. Roberts, “GANSynth: Adversarial neural audio synthesis,” in ICLR, 2019.
[4] R. Manzelli, V. Thakkar, A. Siahkamari, and B. Kulis, “Conditioning deep generative raw audio models for structured automatic music,” in ISMIR, 2018.
[5] C. Hawthorne, A. Stasyuk, A. Roberts, I. Simon, C.-Z. A. Huang, S. Dieleman, E. Elsen, J. Engel, and D. Eck, “Enabling factorized piano music modeling and generation with the MAESTRO dataset,” in ICLR, 2019.
[6] J. Engel, L. Hantrakul, C. Gu, and A. Roberts, “DDSP: Diﬀerentiable digital signal processing,” in ICLR, 2020.
[7] B. Hayes, C. Saitis, and G. Fazekas, “Neural waveshaping synthesis,” in ISMIR, 2021.
[8] Y. Ren, X. Tan, T. Qin, J. Luan, Z. Zhao, and T.-Y. Liu, “DeepSinger: Singing voice synthesis with data mined from the web,” in KDD, 2020.
[9] S. Oore, I. Simon, S. Dieleman, D. Eck, and K. Simonyan, “This time with feeling: Learning expressive musical performance,” Neural Computing and Applications, vol. 32, pp. 955–967, 2020.
[10] J. Shen, R. Pang, R. J. Weiss, M. Schuster, N. Jaitly, Z. Yang, Z. Chen, Y. Zhang, Y. Wang, R. Skerry-Ryan, R. A. Saurous, Y. Agiomyrgiannakis, and Y. Wu, “Natural TTS synthesis by conditioning WaveNet on mel spectrogram predictions,” in ICASSP, 2018.
[11] R. Prenger, R. Valle, and B. Catanzaro, “WaveGlow: A ﬂowbased generative network for speech synthesis,” in ICASSP, 2019.
[12] K. Kumar, R. Kumar, T. de Boissiere, L. Gestin, W. Z. Teoh, J. Sotelo, A. de Brebisson, Y. Bengio, and A. Courville, “MelGAN: Generative adversarial networks for conditional waveform synthesis,” in NeurIPS, 2019.
[13] J. B. Jungil Kong, Jaehyeon Kim, “HiFi-GAN: Generative adversarial networks for eﬃcient and high ﬁdelity speech synthesis,” in NeurIPS, 2010.
[14] B. Wang and Y.-H. Yang, “PerformanceNet: Score-to-audio music generation with multi-band convolutional residual network,” in AAAI, 2019.
[15] F. Schimbinschi, C. Walder, S. M. Erfani, and J. Bailey, “SynthNet: Learning to synthesize music end-to-end,” in ĲCAI, 2019.
[16] J. W. Kim, R. Bittner, A. Kumar, and J. P. Bello, “Neural music synthesis for ﬂexible timbre control,” in ICASSP, 2019.
[17] Y. Wu, E. Manilow, Y. Deng, R. Swavely, K. Kastner, T. Cooĳmans, A. Courville, C.-Z. A. Huang, and J. Engel, “MIDI-DDSP: Detailed control of musical performance via hierarchical modeling,” in ICLR, 2022.

[18] X. Tan, T. Qin, F. Soong, and T.-Y. Liu, “A survey on neural speech synthesis,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.15561, 2021.

[19] A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A. N. Gomez, Ł. Kaiser, and I. Polosukhin, “Attention is all you need,” in NeurIPS, 2017.

[20] Y. Wang, R. Skerry-Ryan, D. Stanton, Y. Wu, R. J. Weiss, N. Jaitly, Z. Yang, Y. Xiao, Z. Chen, S. Bengio, Q. Le, Y. Agiomyrgiannakis, R. Clark, and R. A. Saurous, “Tacotron: Towards end-to-end speech synthesis,” in INTERSPEECH, 2017.

[21] Y. Ren, Y. Ruan, X. Tan, T. Qin, S. Zhao, Z. Zhao, and T.-Y. Liu, “FastSpeech: Fast, robust and controllable text to speech,” in NeurIPS, 2019.

[22] C. Yu, H. Lu, N. Hu, M. Yu, C. Weng, K. Xu, P. Liu, D. Tuo, S. Kang, G. Lei, D. Su, and D. Yu, “DurIAN: Duration informed attention network for multimodal synthesis,” in INTERSPEECH, 2020.

[23] “FluidSynth,” https://www.fluidsynth.org/.

[24] “Musescore general soundfont,” https://musescore.org/ en/handbook/3/soundfonts-and-sfz-files.

[25] “International Piano-e-competition,” piano-e-competition.com/.

https://www.

[26] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,” in ICLR, 2015.

[27] C.-M. Chien, J.-H. Lin, C.-Y. Huang, P.-C. Hsu, and H.-Y. Lee, “Investigating on incorporating pretrained and learnable speaker representations for multi-speaker multi-style text-to-speech,” in ICASSP, 2021.

[28] C. Raﬀel and D. P. W. Ellis, “Intuitive analysis, creation and manipulation of MIDI data with pretty_midi,” in ISMIR LateBreaking Demos, 2014.

[29] H.-W. Dong, K. Chen, J. McAuley, and T. Berg-Kirkpatrick, “MusPy: A toolkit for symbolic music generation,” in ISMIR, 2020.

[30] C.-H. Yang, P.-C. Li, A. W. Y. Su, L. Su, and Y.-H. Yang, “Automatic violin synthesis using expressive musical term features,” in DAFx, 2016.

[31] C.-C. Shih, P.-C. Li, Y.-J. Lin, Y.-L. Wang, A. W. Y. Su, L. Su, and Y.-H. Yang, “Analysis and synthesis of the violin playing style of Heifetz and Oistrakh,” in DAFx, 2017.

[32] P. Isola, J.-Y. Zhu, T. Zhou, and A. A. Efros, “Image-to-image translation with conditional adversarial networks,” in CVPR, 2017.

[33] J. Yang, J.-S. Bae, T. Bak, Y. Kim, and H.-Y. Cho, “GANSpeech: Adversarial training for high-ﬁdelity multi-speaker speech synthesis,” in INTERSPEECH, 2021.

5

A. PREPROCESSING DETAILS

We downmix the recordings to mono and downsample them to 16 kHz using FFmpeg. We then convert them into mel spectrograms using librosa. For the mel spectrogram computation, we use a ﬁlter length of 1024, a hop length of 256 and a window size of 1024 in the short-time Fourier transform (STFT), and we use 80 mel bands in mel scale conversion. We summarize these parameters in Table 3.

Table 3: Preprocessing parameters

Parameter
Audio channels Sampling rate STFT ﬁlter length STFT hop length STFT window size Mel bands

Value
mono 16 kHz 1024 256 1024 80

B. NETWORK ARCHITECTURES
B.1. Alignment model
We illustrate the proposed alignment model in Fig. 7. We use 128 dimensions for all embeddings. For the transformer encoder, we use 3 transformer layers, each consisting of a multi-head attention (MHA) and a position-wise feed-forward network (FFN) sub-layer. We use 64 hidden neurons and 2 attention heads for each MHA layer. For each FFN layer, we use 256 hidden neurons with kernel sizes of 9 and 1 for the two convolutional layers. Further, we use a maximum sequence length of 1000 and clip the time and duration to 96. We summarize these hyperparameters in Table 4.

Table 4: Alignment model architecture

Parameter
Encoder layers MHA heads MHA hidden neurons FFN hidden neurons FFN kernel sizes Max sequence length Max time Max duration

Value
3 2 64 256 9, 1 1000 96 96

B.2. Synthesis model
For the synthesis model, we use 128 dimensions for all embeddings. For the transformer model, we use 3 and 6 transformer layers for the encoder and decoder, respectively. We use 128 hidden neurons and 2 attention heads for each MHA layer. For each FFN layer, we use 256 hidden neurons with kernel sizes of 9 and 1 for the two convolutional layers. In addition, we use a maximum sequence length of 1000. We also clip the time and duration to 96 and 100 for the violin and piano datasets, respectively. We summarize these hyperparameters in Table 5. We base our implementation on the source code kindly provided in [27].3

Table 5: Synthesis model architecture

Parameter
Encoder layers Decoder layers MHA heads MHA hidden neurons FFN hidden neurons FFN kernel sizes Max sequence length Max time Max duration
∗100 for the piano dataset

Value
3 6 2 128 512 9, 1 1000 96∗ 96∗

Fig. 7: An illustration of the proposed alignment model.

B.3. Inversion model
For the inversion model, we use the network architecture of the Hiﬁ-GAN v2 model proposed in [13]. We base our implementation on the source code kindly provided in [13].4
B.4. Baseline model
We base the baseline model on the same Hiﬁ-GAN v2 model [13]. In addition, we include an additional linear layer that maps the input piano roll to a hidden vector whose
3https://github.com/ming024/FastSpeech2 4https://github.com/jik876/hifi-gan

6

dimension matches the input dimension of the Hiﬁ-GAN v2 model. Further, we include an additional embedding layer to condition the baseline model on the input performer IDs. The outputs of these two layers are summed up and fed as the input to the Hiﬁ-GAN v2 model.

C. TRAINING DETAILS

We use a batch size of 16 and apply a dropout rate of 0.2 after each sub-layer. We use the same optimizer settings as the original implementation of transformer [19]. For the alignment model, we apply the learning rate annealing schedule used in [27]. We summarize these hyperparameters in Table 6. Unlike [21], we train the alignment and synthesis models separately as we ﬁnd that joint training hinders convergence. For the violin dataset, we train the alignment, synthesis and inversion models for 10K, 100K and 1M steps, respectively. For the piano dataset, we train the synthesis and inversion models for 250K and 1M steps, respectively. For each dataset, the inversion model is trained once and used with diﬀerent synthesis models.

Table 6: Training hyperparameters

Parameter
Batch size Dropout Adam optimizer 𝛽1 Adam optimizer 𝛽2 Adam optimizer 𝜖 Gradient clipping threshold Warm up steps (alignment model) Warm up steps (synthesis model) Learning rate annealing steps∗ Learning rate annealing rate∗
∗Applied to the alignment model only

Value
16 0.2 0.9 0.98 10−9 1.0 1000 4000 10K, 20K, 50K 0.5

7

