arXiv:2110.04899v1 [cs.SI] 10 Oct 2021

Inﬂuencing the Inﬂuencers: Evaluating Person-to-Person Inﬂuence on Social Networks
Using Granger Causality ⋆
Richard Kuzma, Iain J. Cruickshank, and Kathleen M. Carley
CASOS Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, {rkuzma2, icruicks}@andrew.cmu.edu, kathleen.carley@cs.cmu.edu http://www.casos.cs.cmu.edu/
Abstract. We introduce a novel method for analyzing person-to-person content inﬂuence on Twitter. Using an Ego-Alter framework and Granger Causality, we examine President Donald Trump (the Ego) and the people he retweets (Alters) as a case study. We ﬁnd that each Alter has a diﬀerent scope of inﬂuence across multiple topics, diﬀerent magnitude of inﬂuence on a given topic, and the magnitude of a single Alter’s inﬂuence can vary across topics. This work is novel in its focus on person-toperson inﬂuence and content-based inﬂuence. Its impact is two-fold: (1) identifying “canaries in the coal mine” who could be observed by misinformation researchers or platforms to identify misinformation narratives before super-inﬂuencers spread them to large audiences, and (2) enabling digital marketing targeted toward upstream Alters of super-inﬂuencers.
Keywords: Inﬂuence, Social Media, Granger Causality
1 Introduction
Inﬂuence in social networks remains one of the mainstays of social network analysis. Recently, with the advent of online social networks and the inﬂuence that online misinformation and disinformation can have, social inﬂuence has taken on added importance and dimensions. In this work, we build upon the foundations of social inﬂuence by examining social inﬂuence at the Ego network level. Using an Ego-Alter framework we identify an Ego (Donald Trump), examine which Twitter accounts he retweets most to identify key Alters (e.g. Ivanka Trump,
⋆ The research for this paper was supported in part by the Knight Foundation and the Oﬃce of Naval Research Grant (N000141812106) and an Omar N. Bradley Fellowship, and by the center for Informed Democracy and Social-cybersecurity (IDeaS) and the center for Computational Analysis of Social and Organizational Systems (CASOS) at Carnegie Mellon University. The views and conclusions are those of the authors and should not be interpreted as representing the oﬃcial policies, either expressed or implied, of the Knight Foundation, Oﬃce of Naval Research or the US Government.

2

Richard Kuzma et al.

Linsdey Graham), identify tweet topics from the Ego using unsupervised machine learning, build a supervised machine learning classiﬁer to classify tweets of Alters into those topics [2, 3]. Then for a given topic, we measured the inﬂuence of each Alter on the Ego by measuring the Granger causality on the Alter’s tweet time series on the Ego’s tweet time series.
We devised this method in order to answer the question, “who inﬂuences the inﬂuencers?” Given the role that social media super-inﬂuencers may play in the spread of (mis)information online, identifying who inﬂuences them, what topics they are inﬂuenced on, and how much they are inﬂuenced could be key to future misinformation studies.

Fig. 1. Example of an Alter’s Tweets aﬀecting the Ego’s Tweets for a given topic. Certain topics in the Alter’s tweets are then Tweeted, with a time-delay by the Ego.
Our work is novel from other applications of Granger causality for a few reasons. Most Granger causality research on social media focuses on (1) populationlevel inﬂuence, (ours focuses on person-to-person inﬂuence); (2) sentiment analysis, (ours focuses on topics analysis); and (3) impact of social media behavior on real world events such as ﬁnancial markets or protests (our work focuses on inﬂuence within online behavior on Twitter) [4,7,27]. Other work using Granger causality to examine person-to-person inﬂuence on social media examined sharing of explicit URLs between Twitter accounts, but not the content or topic of tweets as we do [35].

2 Background

Richard Kuzma et al.

3

The last few years have seen incredible advances in, and need for, social cybersecurity. Social Cybersecurity is an emerging ﬁeld that looks at the intersection of human behavior in a cyber mediated information environment [10]. In particular, recent events like the COVID-19 pandemic and use of online disinformation in various national elections have highlighted the need to better understand the ways in which mis- and disinformation are spread online [8, 36]. Previous works have generally focused on the role of bots and trolls in their roles in spreading mis- and disinformation [5, 6, 10, 24, 26, 37]. More recently, coordination among cyborg or fully human accounts has been studied as means by which malicious actors can propagate mis- and disinformation [20,30,31]. The insight of coordinated spread by social media accounts is even being used to investigate cross-platform mis- and disinformation spread [34]. To date, much of the research in online misand disinformation campaigns has focused on particular types of accounts and coordination among accounts.
One area of the spread of online mis- and disinformation that is less wellstudied is the role of online social media inﬂuencers. Social media inﬂuencers, or those online accounts with the ability to reach hundreds of thousands, if not millions, of other social media users with their content represent an important component of the social media landscape, by virtue of their reach. Recent work has shown that social media inﬂuencers can often have an outsized impact on the information quality of any given online discussion. For example, one study showed that the former U.S. President Donald Trump was responsible for over 30% of the COVID-19 misinformation on Twitter [15]. As another example, the ‘dirty dozen’, a collection of only twelve accounts, are responsible for the vast majority of anti-vaccination content online [14]. Additionally, recent disinformation campaigns, like Secondary Infektion have deliberately sought to target social media inﬂuencers to get them to spread disinformation [1, 17]. Thus it is clear that social media inﬂuencers can play a tremendous role in the spread of mis- and disinformation.
It is also important to note that the study of inﬂuence in social networks has a long history with much research into the topic. The study of inﬂuence in social networks pre-dates online social networks and has been used to understand everything from individuals’ behaviors to collective action of groups [13, 18, 19]. Many of the models designed for understanding social inﬂuence work at the adjacency matrix-level of the social networks, and are fundamentally matrix based models [16, 28]. As such, these models tend to look more at population levels of inﬂuence. Less studied within the social network analysis community is the role and exercise of social inﬂuence of Ego networks.
An important consideration when studying inﬂuence is the role of causality. Granger causality is a statistical method that examines whether X has predictive power in describing Y [22]. Xt is said to Granger-cause Yt if Yt+1 can be better explained by past values of Yt and past values of Xt than by the presence of past values of Yt alone.

4

Richard Kuzma et al.

2.1 Data and Deﬁnitions
We retrieved tweets from Donald Trump from the Trump Twitter Archive [9]. This repository contains 56,571 tweets and retweets from Donald Trump’s twitter account. Reports indicate that not all tweets from the @RealDonaldTrump twitter account come directly from Donald Trump. Prior to the presidency, it was believed that tweets from an Android device were from Donald Trump while other platforms (iPhone, web) were not. Once Donald Trump became president, he switched to a specially-issued iPhone. At least one staﬀer was trusted with @RealDonaldTrump twitter privileges. Tweets came from Donald Trump, direct dictations to staﬀers, and presumably from the close, trusted staﬀers themselves attempting to channel Donald Trump’s head space [12]. Given the importance of the Twitter audience to Donald Trump, we believe that all tweets from the account, even those from staﬀers instead of Trump himself, accurately reﬂect Donald Trump’s wishes and are worth studying as if they came from Trump himself.

3 Methods

Fig. 2. Overview of Method. Our method consists of three, main steps: gathering the data and constructing the ego-later network, ﬁnding topics in the textual data and building a classiﬁer of those topics, and then testing for causality in the ego-alter network on those topics.
Our method has three stages: gathering data, identifying topics of conversation, and determining granger causality.
3.1 Gathering Data
We gathered tweets from the Trump Twitter Archive, which retained copies of all of Trump’s tweets and retweets from before Trump’s Twitter suspension. CSV and JSON ﬁles with all captured tweets are available at the Trump Twitter Archive. We limited tweets to the time that Donald Trump was President of the United States and active on Twitter, January 20th, 2017 to January 8th, 2020. We hypothesized that the information Trump ingested aﬀected the information he output. In other words, what he retweeted aﬀected what he tweeted. We found

Richard Kuzma et al.

5

12 accounts from individuals Trump retweeted the most (the Alters). We excluded Trump’s retweets of @WhiteHouse and of himself (@RealDonaldTrump). These Alters included family members, conservative media pundits, and members of Congress. We used SNScrape, an open-source tool, to get the tweet IDs of these 12 Alter accounts [25]. The original tweets of these accounts were available, but data was not available on who these Alters retweeted. We used these tweet IDs to get the tweet content and metadata through a process known as hydration, using Hydrator, another open-source tool [29].

3.2 Identifying Topics
We cleaned Trump’s tweets by extracting URLs, mentions, and “RT” (used for manual retweets when Trump quoted another twitter user) from tweets. We also used the gensim Python library to preprocess tweets by removing punctuation and making all words lowercase. We then tokenized the tweets and found common bigrams and trigrams using the gensim library. Bigrams are two-word sequences like “crooked hillary” or “sleepy joe” and trigrams are three-word sequences like “make america great.” Following tokenization, we embedded the tweets using the Universal Sentence Encoder (USE) from Google Research which was available at the TensorFlow Hub [11,21]. We also featurized all tweets using the term frequency-inverse document frequency (TF-IDF) from the scikit learn library [32].
We chose the USE because it was built for short sequences ranging from a sentence to a short paragraph in length, which is similar to the length of a tweet, and performs well in semantic similarity tasks, determining if one sequence is similar to another. We performed k-medoids clustering [38] on the USE embeddings to identify topic clusters and within those topic groups examined the most important words by averaging the TF-IDF scores of all documents within a given USE cluster.
We chose to cluster only on the Ego’s tweets because including Alter tweets in the topic classiﬁer would dilute the Ego’s tweet content with Alter content when forming clusters. With 12 Alters in our case study, it is possible topics would drift toward Alter content rather than Ego content, making a classiﬁer predict whether a given Alter’s tweet was like other Alter tweets rather than similar to the Ego’s tweet. We settled on eight topics for Trump’s tweets through a combination of silhouette score [33] from the k-medoid clustering of USE embeddings and interpretation of the TF-IDF top words for each cluster.
We categorized each Alter’s tweets into one of the categories of Trump’s tweets. To do this we train a Support Vector Classiﬁer on Trump’s tweets, using the USE embeddings as features and the unsupervised topic clusters as the label. Our ﬁnal model had a weighted F-1 score of 0.91.
For each Alter, we clean the tweets using the same cleaning pipeline as Trump’s tweets then embed the tweets using USE embeddings. We then use the model trained to predict Trump’s tweet categories to predict the Alter’s tweet categories. Now that the Alter’s tweets are categorized, we turn them into eight time series, one for each of the topic clusters. We use weeks as time-steps

6

Richard Kuzma et al.

Fig. 3. Top 50 words and phrases used by Donald Trump in each topic (ranked by TF-IDF score). Clusters determined by USE embeddings.
because we found days contained too few tweets to make an eﬀective time series for each topic.
3.3 Granger Causality
We create a time-series with units of weeks on the x-axis and number of user’s tweets on a given topic on the y-axis. The Ego, E, and Alters, A1 to An, each each have m time series, where m is the number of topics. Then, for a given Alter (e.g. Ivanka Trump) and a given topic (e.g. Campaigns) we want to ﬁnd if the Alter’s tweets granger-cause (have predictive power to describe) the the tweets of the Ego (e.g. Donald Trump).
We ﬁrst considered granger causality at the level of days, but found that most users did not have enough data when viewing topics at the day level. We think weeks are a viable time scale because intuition suggests that an Alter may tweet about a topic of importance to them repeatedly. In future work, it would be worth considering a 2-3 day rolling window
Testing for granger causality requires that both time series are stationary, that is, the mean, variance, and autocorrelation do not change with time. Sta-

Richard Kuzma et al.

7

tionary was checked with the Augmented Dickey Fuller test [23]. If a time series is not stationary, it may be made stationary by diﬀerencing the time series. This requires subtracting the number of tweets at time t from the number of tweets at time t − 1. If the time series of the Alter’s or Trump’s tweets for a given topic are not stationary, both time series were diﬀerenced and stationarity re-examined. This way both time series always had the same amount of diﬀerencing.
If the time series could be made stationary, a granger causality test can then be done. Again, this test determines if Yt (Trump’s tweets on a topic) is better explained by Yt−n (Trump’s previous tweets on that topic) alone or Yt−n and Xt−n (Alter’s previous tweets on that same topic).

4 Results
Diﬀerent Alters inﬂuence the Ego on diﬀerent topics. Even among Alters whose tweets granger-cause Trump’s tweets, some Alters have a more immediate eﬀect (1 week) while others aﬀect Trump’s tweets with six to eight weeks of lag.
Members of Congress (Mark Meadows, Jim Jordan, GOP Chairwoman) had inﬂuence on the “Congress” topic with one week lag between their tweets and Trump’s. Jim Jordan and GOP Chairwoman also inﬂuenced the “Investigations” topic with a one week lag.
Conservative pundits (Mark Levin, Gregg Jarrett, and Tom Fitton) inﬂuenced the most topics (6-7), though not all with immediate eﬀect. Their tweets on “Fake News,” “Campaigning,”, and “Investigations” (along with pundit Charlie Kirk, though less so with Tom Fitton) had 1-3 week lags between their tweets and Trumps.
Donald Trump Jr had inﬂuence on “Fake News,” “Congress,” “Campaigning,” and “America First” topics, all with 1-3 week lags. Ivanka Trump only inﬂuenced “America First” and “Praising Trump” but with 5-6 week lags. Eric Trump had inﬂuence on more topics, but a mix of immediate lag (1-3 week) and delayed lag (6-7 week) inﬂuence.
Among Alters that inﬂuenced ﬁve or more topics (Eric Trump, Mark LEvin, Gregg Jarrett, and Tom Fitton), the immediacy of inﬂuence was not consistent. Often the Alter had a few topics with immediate lag inﬂuence (1-2 week) and a few with delayed lag inﬂuence (7-8 week).
We chose to do individual hypothesis testing and felt the low p-values would not substantively change with multiple hypothesis testing, but future work may choose to multiple hypothesis testing for added rigor.

5 Discussion
In this paper we ask “who inﬂuences the inﬂuencers?” and introduce a novel method for examining person-to-person inﬂuence on Twitter using an Ego-Alter framework for ﬁnding which Alters inﬂuence the Ego’s posts on social media, on which topics these Alters inﬂuence the Ego, and the time delay between Alter

8

Richard Kuzma et al.

Fig. 4. P-Values for granger causality test. Num lags in parenthesis (max 8 weeks). Alters shown in three groups: (1) family/close advisors, (2) members of Congress, and (3) political commentators.
posts and Ego posts. We show this speciﬁcally with tweets from Donald Trump and the ﬁrst-order Alters he interacts with on Twitter, but believe this work could be extended to examine other inﬂuencers on Twitter and their networks, to include second and third-order Alters farther away from the Ego’s immediate network, and attempted on other social media platforms (Parler, Facebook).
Our results show substantial variation in the inﬂuence of Alters on an Ego. While our work conﬁrms the general theories of social inﬂuence in that social inﬂuence aﬀects an individual’s behavior, we also note what inﬂuences an individual and when they inﬂuence that individual are heterogeneous entities. Some Alters have a greater scope of inﬂuence. Of Donald Trump’s eight tweet topics, some Alters inﬂuence only one or two topics while others inﬂuence seven of the eight topics. Some Alters have narrow, but powerful, inﬂuence. Charlie Kirk, a conservative talk show host, inﬂuences Trump on only two topics, “investigations” and “democrat obstruction.” Trump’s tweets lag Kirk’s by only one week, showing that Kirk has high inﬂuence on these topics. Five other Alters inﬂuence the “investigations” topic and three of them also have a one-week lag on their inﬂuence, so Kirk is not special in this category. On “democrat obstruction,” however, only two other Alters with inﬂuence. Kirk has a one-week lag between his “democrat obstruction” tweets and Trumps, while the other Alters have a seven-week lag, indicating less inﬂuence on this topic.
Diﬀerent Alters inﬂuence diﬀerent topics and should not be viewed as substitutable. Tom Fitton, a conservative activist and President of Judicial Watch, is very inﬂuential in the “fake news,” “america ﬁrst,” and “praising trump” categories whereas Jim Jordan, a Congressman from Ohio, is highly inﬂuential on topics of “congress,” “campaigning,” and “investigations.”

Richard Kuzma et al.

9

Some Alters inﬂuence diﬀerent topics diﬀerently. This suggests that some Alters are more inﬂuential on certain topics than others. For instance, Gregg Jarrett, a conservative American television commentator, inﬂuences Trump’s tweets on seven of eight topics. On “fake news” and “investigations” his tweets inﬂuence Trump’s after a one-week lag. On “MAGA” and “America First” his tweets inﬂuence Trump’s after a ﬁve-week and seven-week lag, respectively. Jarett would be a good inﬂuence vector for “fake news” and “investigations” but not as good for “MAGA” and “America First”

5.1 Future Work
Despite the useful results and demonstration of using granger-causality in understanding peer-to-peer inﬂuence on social media, there are limitations to this work. We examine a speciﬁc case of inﬂuence surrounding Donald Trump, without any comparison to how these Alters aﬀected other Twitter users or how other Egos are inﬂuenced by their respective Alters . We focused on this base case because the Trump Twitter Archive permitted us to study the retweets of the Ego to identify the most-retweeted Alters. Generally, retweets of speciﬁc Twitter accounts are not available through the Twitter API nor are they available through Python libraries like SNScrape, making data collection diﬃcult. If retweets of Alters were available, research could be done on whether secondorder Alters (e.g. someone who Ivanka Trump retweets a lot) has inﬂuence on the Ego (Donald Trump) through the ﬁrst-order Alter (Ivanka Trump).
We see two uses of this inﬂuence work. First, in the disinformation space, using Alters as “canaries in the coal mine” who could be observed by misinformation researchers or platforms to notice new misinformation narratives before super-inﬂuencers catch hold of these narratives and spread them to millions of people. Second, in the marketing space, advertisers may not have the budget to pay a super-inﬂuencer to market their product, but by paying the Alters of the Ego, the advertiser may be able to inﬂuence the super-inﬂuencer to support the product being marketed.

References
1. Secondary infektion (2021), https://secondaryinfektion.org/ 2. Arnaboldi, V., Conti, M., Passarella, A., Pezzoni, F.: Analysis of ego network
structure in online social networks. International Conference on Privacy, Security, Risk and Trust and 2012 International Conference on Social Computing 10, 31–40 (2012) 3. Arnaboldi, V., Conti, M., Passarella, A., Pezzoni, F.: Ego networks in twitter, an experimental analysis pp. 3459–3464 (2013) 4. Bastos, M.T., Mercea, D., Charpentier, A.: Tents, tweets, and events: The interplay between ongoing protests and social media. Journal of Communication 65(2) (2015) 5. Beskow, D.: Finding and Characterizing Information Warfare Campaigns. Ph.D. thesis (2020) 6. Bessi, A., Ferrara, E.: Social bots distort the 2016 u.s. presidential election online discussion. First Monday 21(11) (2016)

10

Richard Kuzma et al.

7. Bolllen, J., Mao, H., Zeng, X.: Twitter mood predicts the stock market. Journal:

of Computational Science 2(1), 1–8 (2011)

8. Brangham, W.: “tech heads testify on misinformation in the aftermath of jan

6 riots. ” PBS. org, https://www.pbs.org/newshour/show/tech-heads-testify-on-

misinformation-in-the-aftermath-of-jan-6-riots, Mar 25 (2021)

9. Brendan: Trump twitter archive v2 (2021), https://www.thetrumparchive.com/

10. Carley, K.M.: Social cybersecurity: an emerging science (2020)

11. Cer, D, e.a.: Universal Sentence Encoder. ArXiv (2018),

https://arxiv.org/abs/1803.11175

12. Chute, N.: He writes trump’s tweets and has been with trump’s campaign since

day one (2019)

13. Coussi-Korbel, S., Fragaszy, D.M.: On the relation between social dynamics and

social learning. Animal Behaviour 50(6), 1441–1453 (1995)

14. Dozen, T.D.: Center for Countering Digital Hate (2021)

15. Evanega, S, e.a.: Quantifying sources and themes in the covid-19 ‘infodemic’ (2020)

16. Flache, A., M¨as, M., Feliciani, T., Chattoe-Brown, E., Deﬀuant, G.,

Huet, S., Lorenz: Models of social inﬂuence: Towards the next fron-

tiers. Journal of Artiﬁcial Societies and Social Simulation 20(4) (2017),

http://jasss.soc.surrey.ac.uk/20/4/2.html .doi:10.18564/jasss.3521

17. Foundation, M.: Disinformation about belarus spreads in the balkans via online

portals and social media (2020)

18. Friedkin, N., Johnsen, E.: Social inﬂuence network theory: A sociological exami-

nation of small group dynamics (structural analysis in the social sciences) (2011)

19. Friedkin, N.E., Proskurnikov, A.V., Tempo, R., Parsegov, S.E.: Network science on

belief system dynamics under logic constraints. Science 354(6310), 321–326 (2016),

https://science.sciencemag.org/content/354/6310/321

20. Giglietto, F., Righetti, N., Rossi, L., Marino, G.: It takes a village to manipulate the

media: coordinated link sharing behavior during 2018 and 2019 italian elections.

Information, Communication & Society 23(6), 867–891 (2020)

21. Google: Universal sentence encoder [computer software] (2018)

22. Granger, C.W.J.: Investigating causal relations by econometric models and cross-

spectral methods. Econometrica 37(3), 424–438 (1969)

23. Greene, W.H.: Econometric Analysis. Macmillan Publishing Company (199)

24. Hui, P.M., Yang, K.C., Torres-Lugo, C., Monroe, Z., McCarty, M., Serrette,

B.D., Pentchev, V., Menczer, F.: Botslayer: real-time detection of bot am-

pliﬁcation on twitter. Journal of Open Source Software 4(42), 1706 (2019),

https://doi.org/10.21105/joss.01706

25. JustAnotherArchivist:

snscrape

[computer

software]

(2021),

https://github.com/JustAnotherArchivist/snscrape

26. M, H.W., S, G., A, D., M, R., L, U., HA, S., DH, E., L, L., Curtis: Bots and mis-

information spread on social media: Implications for covid-19. Journal of Medical

Internet Research 23(5) (2021)

27. Mittal, A., Goel, A.: Stock prediction using twitter sentiment analysis (2011),

http://cs229.stanford.edu/proj2011/GoelMittal-StockMarketPredictionUsingTwitterSentimentAnalysis.pdf

28. Nedi´c, A., Olshevsky, A., Uribe, C.A.: Graph-theoretic analysis of belief system

dynamics under logic constraints. Scientiﬁc Reports 9 (2019)

29. the Now, D.: Hydrator [computer software], https://github.com/docnow/hydrator

30. Pacheco, D., Hui, P., Torres-Lugo, C., Truong, T., B, F., A, Menczer, F.: Uncov-

ering coordinated networks on social media: Methods and case studies (2020)

Richard Kuzma et al.

11

31. Pacheco, D., Flammini, A., Menczer, F.: Unveiling coordinated groups behind white helmets disinformation. Companion Proceedings of the Web Conference 2020 (WWW ’20), Association for Computing Machinery pp. 611–616 (2020)
32. Pedregosa, F., Varoquaux, G., Gramfort, A., Michel, V., Thirion, B., Grisel, O., Blondel, M., Prettenhofer, P., Weiss, R., Dubourg, V., Vanderplas, J., Passos, A., Cournapeau, D., Brucher, M., Perrot, M., Duchesnay, E.: Scikit-learn: Machine learning in python. Journal of Machine Learning Research 12, 2825–2830 (2011)
33. Shahapure, K.R., Nicholas, C.: Cluster quality analysis using silhouette score. In: 2020 IEEE 7th International Conference on Data Science and Advanced Analytics (DSAA). pp. 747–748 (2020)
34. Starbird, K., Wilson, T.: Cross-platform disinformation campaigns: Lessons learned and next steps (2020)
35. Steeg, G., Galstyan, A.: Information transfer in social media. Proceedings of the 21st international conference on World Wide Web p. 509–518 (2012)
36. T, N., N, K., C, C., A, H., A., H.: The danger of misinformation in the COVID-19 crisis. Missouri Medicine 117(6) (2020)
37. Uyheng, J., Carley, K.M.: Characterizing network dynamics of online hate communities around the covid-19 pandemic. Applied Network Science 6(20) (2021)
38. Velmurugan, T., et al.: Eﬃciency of k-means and k-medoids algorithms for clustering arbitrary data points. Int. J. Computer Technology & Applications 3(5), 1758–1764 (2012)

