1
Mobile Sensing of Two-Dimensional
Bandlimited Fields on Random Paths
Charvi Rastogi and Animesh Kumar Department of Electrical Engineering Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, Mumbai, India - 400076 Email: rastogicharvi@gmail.com, animesh@ee.iitb.ac.in

arXiv:1711.04114v1 [cs.IT] 11 Nov 2017

Abstract—Mobile sensing has been recently proposed for sampling spatial ﬁelds, where mobile sensors record the ﬁeld along various paths for reconstruction. Classical and contemporary sampling typically assumes that the sampling locations are approximately known. This work explores multiple sampling strategies along random paths to sample and reconstruct a two dimensional bandlimited ﬁeld. Extensive simulations are carried out, with insights from sensing matrices and their properties, to evaluate the sampling strategies. Their performance is measured by evaluating the stability of ﬁeld reconstruction from ﬁeld samples. The effect of location unawareness on some sampling strategies is also evaluated by simulations.
I. INTRODUCTION
Sampling and reconstruction of two dimensional bandlimited ﬁelds (signals) is a well studied subject [1], [2]. Recently, mobile sensing was proposed for sampling spatial ﬁelds, where a mobile sensors records the ﬁeld along various paths for reconstruction (interpolation) [3], [4], [5]. The sensing paths considered are mostly deterministic by construction. The main advantage of mobile sensing is a smaller number of sensing stations, at the cost of its mobility. Classical sampling and interpolation assumes that the sampling locations are (approximately) known [1], [2]. Of late, it has also been shown that a

location-unaware mobile sensor can be used to estimate (reconstruct) a one-dimensional spatially bandlimited ﬁeld [6].
With the above background, this work explores multiple sampling strategies along random paths to sample and reconstruct a spatially bandlimited ﬁeld. These sampling strategies are compared and contrasted in this work. For location masking, sensors which average out the collected samples are also considered in some sampling strategies. A two-dimensional bandlimited (ﬁnite support) ﬁeld has a ﬁnite number of non-zero Fourier coefﬁcients. These coefﬁcients represent the degrees of freedom of the ﬁeld. One common theme observed is that oversampling beyond the degree of freedom aids in random path based sampling strategies. The performance of these sampling strategies is evaluated using the stability of spatial ﬁeld reconstruction from ﬁeld samples.
The main result of this work is the design and evaluation of multiple strategies for a two-dimensional bandlimited ﬁeld sampling along random paths. The answers are obtained by extensive simulations along with intuitive insights.
Prior art: Sampling and estimation of bandlimited spatial ﬁelds on equi-spaced parallel paths by mo-

March 25, 2022

DRAFT

2

bile sensors is studied and the aliasing error and measurement-noise is analyzed by Unnikrishnan and Vetterli [3]. Performance of several trajectories for mobile sensing is discussed in [4], [5]. The performance metric used here is path density. Results from classical sampling theory [1], [2] provide schemes for sampling and estimating the ﬁeld based on measurements of the ﬁeld at a countable number of nonuniform collection of points like the one depicted in Fig. 1(a). Location unawareness is introduced in mobile sensing and distributed sensing for one dimensional ﬁeld by Kumar [6], [7]. Observing a spatial ﬁeld at a random location is akin to random sensing studied in compressed sensing [8]. Tools from compressed sensing, therefore, are useful in the understanding of random path based sampling schemes.
II. PRELIMINARIES A. Field model

number of real degrees of freedom to n. At least n samples of the ﬁeld are, therefore, required to reconstruct it.

B. Sampling Schemes

In this work, eight sampling schemes are considered.

They are sequentially described in Section III. Largely,

two sampling schemes are considered: point based sam-

pling and path based sampling. In point based sampling,

samples at various locations are collected in an array.

From (1), each sample g(x, y) can be expressed as

an inner product between n Fourier coefﬁcients and

a complex vector. Thus, m spatial ﬁeld samples at

(xi, yi), 1 ≤ i ≤ m are given by









g(x1, y1)

X11 X12 . . . X1n a[−b, −b]

 ...  =  ...

... . . . ...   ...  ,









g(xm, ym)

Xm1 Xm2 . . . Xmn

a[b, b]

or g = Xa

(2)

It is assumed that g(x, y) is the ﬁeld of interest. It

is two dimensional, continuous and bandlimited, and

supported in Rect[0, 1] := [0, 1]×[0, 1]. Bandlimitedness

implies that

b

b

g(x, y) =

a[k, l] exp(j2π(kx + ly)), (1)

k=−b l=−b

where a[k, l] are the Fourier coefﬁcients of g(x, y).

The ﬁeld is assumed to be temporally ﬁxed (or slowly

varying). It is noted that the problem of estimating a

static ﬁeld with mobile sensor(s) is involved and deserves

a ﬁrst study. The bandwidth in (x, y) dimensions is

assumed to be equal for simplicity, and does not affect

the main results obtained in the paper. The number of

Fourier coefﬁcients is denoted by n := (2b + 1)2, and

denotes the real degrees of freedom. Even though each

Fourier coefﬁcient is complex valued, since g(x, y) is

real valued, conjugate symmetry of a[k, l] limits the

where Xqr = exp(j2π(krxq + lryq)). The matrix X := [Xqr]m×n will be termed as the sensing matrix. The column parameters kr, lr correspond to the Fourier phasors for various (k, l) pairs. The number of columns is therefore n.
In path based sampling, the mobile sensor is an accumulator which averages all the measurements made over a path. Averaging is advantageous since it denoises the readings made, and also does not require location information of individual samples. Similar to (2), a sensing matrix can be formed. If the sensor samples at (xi,1, yi,1), . . . , (xi,pi , yi,pi ) on path i with pi points, then the sensing matrix Xavg has the following entries
1 pi Xavg,ir = pi exp j2π(krxi,t + lryi,t) (3)
t=1
where kr, lr are the values of k, l corresponding to the rth column, as before.

March 25, 2022

DRAFT

(a)
b1

(b) b 1 b2

(c)
b2

(d) b1

(e)

b2

b1

b2

b1

(f)
b2

3
(g)
bc

Fig. 1. The random paths used for spatial sampling are illustrated: (a) benchmark sampling scheme where points are uniformly scattered over the sensing region; (b) the random paths consist of straight lines from boundary to boundary; (c) the random paths are straight lines between interior points; (d) the random paths are random walks; (e) the random paths start at end at designated boundary points; (f) the random paths start and end at designated interior points; and, (g) the random paths originate and end at randomly scattered center points.

C. Measurement-noise model

B. Sampling on random straight line paths

In this work, measurement-noise is modeled by an independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) process having zero mean and ﬁnite variance. If W (x1, y1), W (x2, y2), . . . are the measurement-noise samples, then they are i.i.d. and independent of the ﬁeld and the random path selected for sampling.
III. SAMPLING MODELS
Eight different sampling models, used in simulations, are described in this section. This will help discover randomized sampling schemes from which a bandlimited ﬁeld can be estimated, even when sampling locations are unknown and measurement-noise is present. Most schemes are based on nonuniform random walks (or simply, random walks).

Equispaced straight line paths for ﬁeld sampling were introduced by Unnikrisnan and Vetterli [3]. Let B[0, 1] be the boundary of the region Rect[0, 1]. In this model, a random straight line is chosen by selecting two independent points b1 and b2 with the distribution Uniform(B[0, 1]). It is assumed that the mobile sensor samples from b1 to b2. The inter-sample spacings are chosen according to D ∼ Uniform(0, γ) distribution, where γ > 0 controls the average sample spacing on the path (see Fig. 1(b)). With path angle θ with respect to x-axis, the t-th ﬁeld sample on a path is observed at
xt+1 = xt + dt cos(θ), yt+1 = yt + dt sin(θ). (4)
If p paths and an average Γ samples/path are selected for sampling, then the sensing matrix in (2) will be of the size Γp × n. To avoid an underdetermined system in (2), p > 2b + 1 and Γ ≥ 2b + 1 will be selected.

A. Uniformly scattered ﬁxed location sensors

C. Averaging over random straight line paths

In this model, static sensors are realized at uniformly distributed locations in Rect[0, 1] (see Fig. 1(a)). This static sampling model is well known in the literature for ﬁeld reconstruction [2]. This model will give us the benchmark performance of random sampling for comparisons.

In this sampling model, a path and sampling locations are selected as in Section III-B. However, all the samples along the path are averaged out by the mobile sensor to conserve storage and mask sampling locations. If m is the number of paths, then the sensing matrix in (3) is of size m × n.

March 25, 2022

DRAFT

4

D. Straight line path between two inner points

G. Directed random walk between two inner points

In this sampling model, a random straight line is chosen by selecting two independent points b1 and b2 according to a Uniform(Rect[0, 1]) distribution. The sensor averages samples over a path and traverses according to the rule in (4) (see Fig. 1(c)). If m is the number of paths, the sensing matrix is of size m × n as in (3).

E. Random walk
In this model, the mobile sensor starts at a point b1 chosen uniformly in B[0, 1]. Then, the sensor traverses at each step using a random step-size D ∼ Uniform(0, γ) and an angle θ ∼ Uniform(0, 2π). Sampling locations on the path are given by (4) with θt instead of θ (see Fig. 1(d)). In this model, the sensor may exit the boundary close to b1. For small γ, the sensor may sample at a large number of points as well.

F. Directed random walk between boundary points

In this model, two independent points b1 and b2 are selected according to a Uniform(B[0, 1]) distribution. Path with end points on the same edge of the boundary are rejected. A random walk with p steps is used to create a directed random walk from b1 to b2. The p-step random walk is implemented according to (4) and (x1, y1) = b1. Then to ensure the random walk is directed, the points are modiﬁed as

t

(xt, yt) = (xt, yt) + p (b2 − (xp, yp))

(5)

with 1 ≤ t ≤ p. Note that (x1, y1) = b1 and (xp, yp) = b2. These paths are illustrated in Fig. 1(e) and are inspired from Brownian motion and Brownian bridge [9].

In this model, two independent points, b1 and b2 distributed according to Uniform(Rect[0, 1]) are generated. A directed random walk using the setup in (5) is generated (see Fig. 1(f)).

H. Bee and hive sampling model
In this model, a point bc is selected according to Uniform(Rect[0, 1]) distribution. The mobile sensor starts and ends its random walk at bc using the setup in (5). A total of m such points are generated. This sampling model is inspired by bees that hover around their hive and then return to the same location. The sensor is assumed to be location unaware. This sensing matrix will be of size m × n.

IV. SPATIAL FIELD ESTIMATION METHOD

The general method of reconstruction is explained. Since linear measurements are obtained, a regression based reconstruction is natural. From the samples collected by the mobile sensors (as described in Section III), a regression style estimate of Fourier coefﬁcients a[k, l] are obtained as follows:

a = (X∗X)−1X∗g := Yg

(6)

where g are the ﬁeld samples obtained either by taking

samples or their averages along a path, and X is the

sensing matrix (see (2)).

If the sensor is location unaware, the sensing matrix

is Xun, which is formed by approximating the locations

using the end-points b1, b2 of the path and the number p

of measurements made. The locations are approximated

as

t (xt, yt)un = b1 + p − 1 (b2 − b1),

t = 0, 1, . . . , p − 1. (7)

March 25, 2022

DRAFT

5

See Section V for the effect of location unawareness.

To test the feasibility of sampling, the stability of

pseudo inverse in (6) has to be characterized. Analysis of

the stability is very difﬁcult for all the sampling schemes

presented. So, we will adopt a simulation based ap-

proach. The stability of pseudo-inverse will be quantiﬁed

using the condition number C of a matrix. If samples

are quantized or affected by independent measurement-

noise, then a small condition number ensures that the

estimate a is not too noisy. An ill-posed problem gives an

unstable inverse and has a very high condition number.

The condition number is deﬁned as [8]

σmax (X )

λmax (X ∗ X )

1 2

C2(X) = σmin(X) = λmin(X∗X) (8)

where σ and λ denote the singular and eigenvalues,

respectively. The condition number in our simulations

depends on number of samples/paths m, the step-size

parameter γ, and the location awareness/unawareness of

sensor. The results are discussed next.

V. RESULTS
The condition number corresponding to various sampling models in Section III are presented. These results are obtained by averaging C2(X) over 50 iterations. For computational efﬁciency in determining C2(X), the eigenvalues of X∗X are calculated as it is a smaller matrix than X (see (8)). As noted earlier, a low condition number is more desirable. The number of rows m in the sensing matrix X is always taken to be ≥ n = (2b + 1)2 since it is necessary for the pseudo-inverse of X to exist. So, the number of samples (or paths) is a multiple of (2b + 1)2 along the x-axis. All the results are illustrated in Fig. 2 and the plots are explained next.
A common trend is that with increasing size of sensing matrix m the condition number improves. The benchmark sampling method in Sec. III-A achieves a

condition number lower than 10 for moderate values of

m. The benchmark is the best performance to hope for,

in terms of condition number. The results for sampling

models in Sec. III-B and Sec. III-H are the best among

random sampling strategies and near to the benchmark

performances. This is especially surprising for Sec. III-H

where the location information of sensor is also un-

known. The schemes of Sec. III-C and Sec. III-F which

operate with paths starting and ending at the boundary

are fair; while, their counterparts in Sec. III-D and

Sec. III-G with interior boundary points are average in

performance. The worst scheme is of Sec. III-E, which

consists of a fully random walk.

The condition number trends for all the schemes ex-

cept Sec. III-B can be explained using condition number

results from random matrix theory. From [8], it is known

that if X is an m × n sensing matrix with independent

and sub-Gaussian rows, then for every t > 0 with

probability ≥ 1 − e(−ht2)

√

√

1

≤

σmax (X )

=

C2 (X )

≤

√m

+

H √n

+

t ,

(9)

σmin (X )

m−H n−t

where h, H > 0 are ﬁnite constants that depend only

on the sampling model and not on (n, m). So, condition

number C2(X) provably improves with m.

As step-size γ decreases, location unawareness of

mobile sensors can also be introduced. Loosely speaking,

as the average sampling rate over a straight line path

increases, a random distribution of the points on the

path averages to the equispaced points [6]. Therefore,

the sensing matrix Xun can be approximated as in (7).

This is applicable to schemes in Sec. III-B, Sec. III-C,

and Sec. III-D. In scheme of Sec. III-H, location-

unawareness works since spatial ﬁeld’s variation gets

averaged out over the random walk for small step-size

γ.

Finally, as the number of rows of sensing matrix X

March 25, 2022

DRAFT

6

Sec 3.1

Sec 3.2

Sec 3.3

Sec 3.4

Sec 3.5

Sec 3.6

Sec 3.7

Sec 3.8

Fig. 2. Condition number plots for various strategies are illustrated. The parameters m and step-size γ are varied. For uniformly scattered non mobile sensors, the variation is shown for different values of bandwidth parameter, b, and for the rest b = 10 is ﬁxed. These results are obtained by averaging over 50 iterations. The smallest condition numbers are achieved by schemes of Sec. 3.2 and Sec. 3.8.

increases, measurement-noise ﬁltering naturally happens by regression in (6). A small condition number also ensures that measurement-noise power is less ampliﬁed [10].
VI. CONCLUSIONS Multiple sampling strategies along random paths to sample and reconstruct a two dimensional bandlimited ﬁeld were explored. Using simulations it was found that a bee and hive based location-unaware random sampling design has the best condition number among various random sampling strategies. A close second is random straight-lines based sampling strategy. Most of the obtained results can be explained by using the condition number results from random matrix theory.
REFERENCES
[1] R. Marks, Introduction to Shannon Sampling and Interpolation Theory. New York: Springer-Verlag, 1991.

[2] ——, Advanced Topics in Shannon Sampling and Interpolation Theory. New York: Springer-Verlag, 1993.
[3] J. Unnikrishnan and M. Vetterli, “Sampling and reconstruction of spatial ﬁelds using mobile sensors,” IEEE Trans. Signal Proc., vol. 61, no. 9, pp. 2328–2340, May 2013.
[4] ——, “Sampling high-dimensional bandlimited ﬁelds on lowdimensional manifolds,” IEEE Trans. Info. Theory, vol. 59, no. 4, pp. 2103–2127, 2013.
[5] ——, “On optimal sampling trajectories for mobile sensing,” in Proceedings of the 10th International Conference on Sampling Theory and Applications, 2013, pp. 352–355.
[6] A. Kumar, “On bandlimited ﬁeld estimation from samples recorded by a location-unaware mobile sensor,” IEEE Trans. Info. Theory, vol. 63, no. 4, pp. 2188–2200, Jan. 2017.
[7] ——, “On bandlimited signal reconstruction from the distribution of unknown sampling locations,” IEEE Trans. Signal Proc., vol. 63, no. 5, pp. 1259–1267, Mar. 2015.
[8] Y. C. Eldar and G. K. (eds.), Compressed sensing. Theory and applications. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2012.
[9] R. Durrett, Brownian Motion and Martingales in Analysis. Wadsworth Pub Co, 1984.
[10] P. J. Bickel and K. A. Doksum, Mathematical Statistics Vol I. Upper Saddle River, NJ, USA: Prentice Hall, 2001.

March 25, 2022

DRAFT

