arXiv:1407.0727v2 [math.OC] 5 Jul 2014

Social Game for Building Energy Eﬃciency: Utility Learning, Simulation, and Analysis
Ioannis C. Konstantakopoulos , Lillian J. Ratliﬀ , Ming Jin , S. Shankar Sastry , and Costas Spanos
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California, 94720
{ioanniskon,ratliffl,jinming,sastry,spanos}@eecs.berkeley.edu
Abstract. We describe a social game that we designed for encouraging energy eﬃcient behavior amongst building occupants with the aim of reducing overall energy consumption in the building. Occupants vote for their desired lighting level and win points which are used in a lottery based on how far their vote is from the maximum setting. We assume that the occupants are utility maximizers and that their utility functions capture the tradeoﬀ between winning points and their comfort level. We model the occupants as non-cooperative agents in a continuous game and we characterize their play using the Nash equilibrium concept. Using occupant voting data, we parameterize their utility functions and use a convex optimization problem to estimate the parameters. We simulate the game deﬁned by the estimated utility functions and show that the estimated model for occupant behavior is a good predictor of their actual behavior. In addition, we show that due to the social game, there is a signiﬁcant reduction in energy consumption.
Keywords: Utility Learning, Energy Eﬃciency, Game Theory
1 Introduction
Energy consumption of buildings, both residential and commercial, accounts for approximately 40% of all energy usage in the U.S. [16]. Lighting is a major
This work is supported by NSF CPS:Large:ActionWebs award number 0931843, TRUST (Team for Research in Ubiquitous Secure Technology) which receives support from NSF (award number CCF-0424422), and FORCES (Foundations Of Resilient CybEr-physical Systems) which receives support from NSF (award number CNS-1239166) This research is funded by the Republic of Singapore’s National Research Foundation through a grant to the Berkeley Education Alliance for Research in Singapore (BEARS) for the Singapore-Berkeley Building Eﬃciency and Sustainability in the Tropics (SinBerBEST) Program. BEARS has been established by the University of California, Berkeley as a center for intellectual excellence in research and education in Singapore.

consumer of energy in commercial buildings; one-ﬁfth of all energy consumed in buildings is due to lighting [23].
There have been many approaches to improve energy eﬃciency of buildings through control and automation as well as incentives and pricing. From the meter to the consumer, many control methods, such as model predictive control, have been proposed as a means to improve the eﬃciency of building operations (see, e.g., [3],[5],[6],[13],[18],[12]). From the meter to the energy utility, many economic solutions have been proposed, such as dynamic pricing and smart meter technology, to reduce consumption by providing economic incentives (see, e.g.,[14],[21]).
Many of the past approaches to building energy management only focus on heating and cooling of the building. We are advocating that due to new technological advances in building automation, incentives can be designed around more than just heating, ventilation and air conditioning (HVAC) systems. In particular, our experimental set-up allows us to design incentives based on lighting and individual plug-load in addition to HVAC and interact with occupants through a social game.
Social games have been used to encourage energy eﬃcient behavior in transportation [17] as well as in the healthcare domain for understanding the tradeoﬀ between privacy and desire to win by expending calories [4].
There are many ways in which a building manager can be motivated to encourage energy eﬃcient behavior. The most obvious is that they pay the bill or, due to some operational excellence measure, are required to maintain an energy eﬀcient building. Beyond these motivations, recently demand response programs have begun to be implemented by utility companies with the goal of correcting for improper load forecasting (see, e.g., [1],[15], [11]). In such a program, consumers enter into a contract with the utiltiy company in which they agree to change their demand in accordance with some agreed upon schedule. In this scenario, the building manager may now be required to keep this schedule.
Our approach to eﬃcient building energy management focuses on oﬃce buildings and utilizes new builidng automation products such as the Lutron lighting system1. We design a social game aimed at incentivizing occupants to modify their behavior so that the overall energy consumption in the building is reduced. The social game consists of occupants logging their vote for the lighting setting in the oﬃce and they win points based on how energy eﬃcient their vote is compared to other occupants. The average of the votes is what is actually implemented in the oﬃce. The points are used to determine an occupants likelihood of winning in a lottery. We designed an online platform so that occupants can login and vote, view their points, and observe all occupants consumption patterns and points. This platform also store all the past data allowing us to use it for estimation of the behavior of the occupants.
In this paper we present the results of a social game focused only on the encouraging more energy eﬃcient lighting usage; however, we emphasize that the framework is easily adapted to incorporate the full capabilities of the automation
1 http://www.lutron.com/en-US/Pages/default.aspx
2

installed in our experimental set-up (i.e. lighting, HVAC, and plug-load). The occupants are modeled as utility maximizers who engage in a non-cooperative game with all occupants. We parameterize their utility functions in such a way that we capture the tradeoﬀ between the desire to win and comfort. Using data from the social game that occured over the period of roughly three months, we formulate the utility learning problem as a convex optimization problem and form estimates of each occupants utility function. We simulate the game using the estimated utility functions and show that the Nash equilibrium from the simulations is a good predictor of occupant behavior. Our results are compared to other estimation techniques.
A major advantage of modeling occupants as utility maximizers competing in a game and using the Nash equilibrium concept is this game theoretic model ﬁts in the Stackelberg framework for incentive design in which the builiding manager performs an online estimation of occupant’s utility function and designs incentives for behavior modiﬁcation. This, in essence, is a problem of closingthe-loop around the occupants so that the building manager achieves sustained energy savings. We leave this as future work.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we start with the game theoretic framework for modeling the competitive environment between the non-cooperative occupants. We formulate the utility estimation problem as a convex optimization problem and take a dynamical systems perspective for developing a method of computing the Nash equilibrium of the estimated game. In Sections 3 and 4 we describe the experimental set-up and report on our ﬁndings including utility estimation results as well as simulation of the game corresponding to the estimated utilities. Finally, in Section 5, we make concluding remarks and comment on future research directions.

2 Game Formulation

We begin by describing the game theoretic framework used for modeling the interaction between the occupants. We remark that the use of game theory for modeling the behavior of the occupants has several advantages. First, it is a natural way to model agents competiting over scarce resources. It can also be leveraged in the design of incentives for behavioral change in that it incorporates the ability to model the occupants as strategic players.
Let the number of occupants participating in the game be denoted by n. We model the occupants as utility maximizers having utility functions composed of two terms that capture the tradeoﬀ between comfort and desire to win. We model their comfort level using a Taguchi loss function which is interpreted as modeling occupant dissatisfaction as increasing as variation increases from their desired lighting setting. In particular, each occupant has the following Taguchi loss function as one component of their utility function:

ψi(xi, x−i) = − (x¯ − xi)2

(1)

3

where xi ∈ R is occupant i’s lighting vote, x−i = {x1, . . . , xi−1, xi+1, . . . , xn}, and
1n x¯ = n xi (2)
i=1

is the average of all the occupant votes and is the lighting setting which is

implemented.

Each occupant’s desire to win is modeled using the following function

Ç

å

xb − xi

φi(xi, x−i) = ln ρ nxb − nj=1 xj (3)

where ρ is the total number of points distributed by the building manager and xb is the baseline setting for the lights. The term inside the natural log function is how the points are distributed; ρ, being the total number of points, is multiplied by the distance an occupant’s vote is from the baseline and then normalized by the sum of the diﬀerences of all occupants’ votes from the baseline.
Hence, each occupant’s utility function is given by

fi(xi, x−i) = ψi(xi, x−i) + θiφi(xi, x−i)

(4)

where θi is an unknown parameter. The occupants face the following optimization problem

max fi(xi, x−i)

(5)

xi ∈Si

where Si = [0, 100] ⊂ R is the constraint set for each xi. Note that each occupant’s optimization problem is dependent on the other
occupant’s choice variables. We can explicitly write out the constraint set as follows. Let hi,j(xi, x−i)
for j ∈ {1, 2} denote the constraints on occupant i’s optimization problem. In particular, following Rosen [22], for occupant i, the constraints are

hi,1(xi) = 100 − xi

(6)

hi,2(xi) = xi

(7)

so that we can deﬁne Ci = {xi ∈ R| hi,j(xi) ≥ 0, j ∈ {1, 2}} and C = C1 × · · · × Cn. Thus, the occupants are non-cooperative agents in a continuous game with constraints. We model their interaction using the Nash equilibrium concept.

Deﬁnition 1. A point x ∈ C is a Nash equilibrium for the game (f1, . . . , fn)

on C if

fi(xi, x−i) ≥ fi(xi, x−i) ∀ xi ∈ Si

(8)

for each i ∈ {1, . . . , n}.

The interpretation of the deﬁnition of Nash is as follows: no player can unilaterally deviate and increase their cost.
If the parameters θi ≥ 0, then the game is a concave n-person game on a convex set.

4

Theorem 1 ([22]). A Nash equilibrium exists for every concave n-person game.

Deﬁne the Lagrangian of each players optimization problem as follows:

Li(xi, x−i, µi) = fi(xi, x−i) +

µi,j hi,j (xi)

(9)

j ∈Ai (xi )

where Ai(xi) is the active constraint set at xi. We can deﬁne

 D1L1(x, µi)  ω(x) =  ...  (10)
DnLn(x, µi)

where DiLi denoets the derivative of Li with respect to xi. It is the local representation of the diﬀerential game form [19] corresponding
to the game between the occupants.

Deﬁnition 2 ([19]). A point x∗ ∈ C is a diﬀerential Nash equilibrium for the game (f1, . . . , fn) on C if ω(x∗, µ∗i ) = 0 and DiiLi(x∗, µ∗i ) < 0 where µi,j ≥ 0 for j ∈ Ai(x∗i ).
A suﬃcient condition guaranteeing that a Nash equilibrium x is isolated is that the Jacobian of ω(x), denoted Dω(x), is invertible [19],[22].

2.1 Utility Estimation

We formulate the utility estimation problem as a convex optimization problem by using ﬁrst-order necessary conditions for Nash equilibria. In particular, the gradient of each occupant’s utility function should be identically zero at the observed Nash equilibrium. This is the case since the observed Nash equilibria are all inside the feasible region so that none of the constraints are active, i.e. we do not have to check the derivative of Lagrangian of each occupant’s optimization problem.
In particular, for each observation x(k), we assume that it corresponds to occupants playing a strategy that is approximately a Nash equilibrium where the superscript notation (·)(k) indicates the k-th observation.

Deﬁnition 3. A point x ∈ C is a ε-Nash equilibrium for the game (f1, . . . , fn)

on C if

fi(xi, x−i) ≥ fi(xi, x−i) − ε ∀ xi ∈ Si

(11)

for each i ∈ {1, . . . , n}.

Thus, we can consider ﬁrst-order optimality conditions for each occupants
optimization problem and deﬁne a residual function capturing the amount of suboptimality of each occupants choice x(ik) [10],[20]. Note that all our observations are on the interior of the constraint set so we need only consider the following

5

residual deﬁned by the stationarity condition for each occupant’s optimization problem:

ri(k)(θi) = Difi(x(ik), x(−ki)) = Diψi(x(ik), x(−ki)) + θiDiφi(x(ik), x(−ki))

(12)

Deﬁne r(k)(θ) = [r1(k)(θ1) · · · rn(k)(θn)]T . Given observations {x(k)}Kk=1 where each x(k) ∈ C, we can solve the following
convex optimization problem:

K

min

χ(r(k)(θ)) θi ≥ 0 ∀ i{1, . . . , n}

(13)

θ

k=1

where χ : Rn → R+ is a nonnegative, convex penalty function satisfying χ(z) = 0 if and only if z = 0, i.e. any norm on Rn.
With a speciﬁc choice of χ we can explicitly write the estimation problem as
follows. Let

 Diψi(x(i1), x(−1i))  Ψi =  ...  ,
Diψi(x(iK), x(−Ki ))

 Diφi(x(i1), x(−1i))  Φi =  ... 
Diφi(x(iK), x(−Ki ))

(14)

for each i ∈ {1, . . . , n} and denote θ = [θ1 · · · θn]T . Then, we can formulate the following convex optimization problem to solve for θ:

n

min

Ψi + θiΦi

2 2

θi ≥ 0 ∀ i ∈ {1, . . . , n}

(15)

θ

i=1

Note the constraint that the θi’s be non-negative. This is to ensure that the estimated utility functions are concave. We add this restriction so that we can employ techniques from simulation of dynamical systems to the computation of the Nash equilibrium in the resulting n-person concave game with convex constraints.

2.2 Dynamical Systems Perspective
We can take a dynamical systems perspective in order to come up with a method for computation of the Nash equilibrium (see, e.g. [8], [19], [22]). We ﬁrst write down a reasonable set of dynamics, then we show that a Nash equilibrium is a stable ﬁxed point of these dynamics, and ﬁnally we suggest a subgradient projection method for computation.
It is natural to consider computing Nash equilibria by following the gradient of each occupant’s utility function. Hence, we consider the dynamical system obtained by taking the derivative with respect to their choice variable of the Largrangian’s for each occupant’s optimization problem.
Due to the fact that our constraint set is convex, closed and bounded in Rn and there is a point in its strict interior, we satisfy a constraint qualiﬁcation

6

condition which is a suﬃcient condition for the Karush-Khun-Tucker (KKT) conditions for each occupant’s optimization problem [2]. It is known that for concave games, i.e. concave player utility functions constrained on a convex set, given that the problem satisﬁes a constraint qualiﬁcation condition, then a point satisfying KKT conditions for each player’s optimization problem is a Nash equilibrium [22].
We can study the continuous-time dynamical system generated by the gradient of the Lagrangian of each occupant’s optimization problem with respect to her own choice variable; we let

2
x˙ i = Difi(xi, x−i) + µi,j Dihi,j (xi)
j=1

(16)

for i ∈ {1, . . . , n} and where µi,j is the j-th dual variable for occupant i’s optimization problem. The ﬁrst term is the derivative of occupant i’s utility with
respect to her own choice variable xi. The second term, with the appropriate dual variables µi,j, ensures that for any initial condition in the feasible set C, the trajectory solving (16) remains in C. The right-hand side of (16) is the projection
of the psuedogradient on the manifold formed by the active constraints at x [22].
We can rewrite the dynamics in a compact form as follows. Let H(x) = [Dh1 Dh2] where hj(x) = [h1,j · · · hn,j]T for j ∈ {1, 2} and D is the Jacobian operator. Also, let µ = [µ1,1 · · · µn,1 µ1,2 · · · µn,2]T . Deﬁne F (x, µ) = ω(x) + H(x)µ. Then, the dynamics can be written as

x˙ = F (x, µ), µ ∈ U (x)

(17)

where


  U (x) = µ
 

F (x, µ)

= min
νj ≥0,j∈J(x)
νj =0,j∈/J(x)


  F (x, ν)
 

(18)

and J(x) = {j| hj(x) ≤ 0}. This formulation is given in the seminal work by Rosen [22] along with the theorem that states that for any initial condition in C, a continuous solution x(t) to (17) exists such that x(t) ∈ C for all t > 0. Thus, we have the following results.

Proposition 1 (Theorem 8 [22]). The dynamical system (17) is asymptotically stable on C if Dω(x, µ) has eigenvalues in the open left-half plane for x ∈ C and µ ∈ U (x).

Further, if x∗ ∈ C is a diﬀerential Nash equilibrium, we can linearize ω around x∗ and get the following suﬃcient condition guaranteeing x∗ attracts nearby
strategies under the gradient ﬂow F (x, µ).

Proposition 2. If x∗ ∈ C is a diﬀerential Nash equilibrium, and the eigenvalues of Dω(x∗, µ∗) are in the open left-half plane, then x∗ is an exponentially stable
ﬁxed point of the continuous-time dynamical system (16).

7

Note that since in our estimation, we restrict θi ≥ 0, the fi will be concave; hence, Nash equilibria of the game will be diﬀerential Nash equilibria.
These results imply that we can simulate the dynamical system in (17) in order to compute Nash equilibria of the game. Using a forward Euler discretization scheme and a subgradient projection method, we can compute Nash equilibria of the constrained game. The subgradient projection method is known to converge to the unique Nash equilibrium of the constrained n-person concave game [8].
3 Experimental Set-Up
The social game for energy savings that we have designed is such that occupants in an oﬃce builing vote according to their usage preferences of shared resources and are rewarded with points based on how energy eﬃcient their strategy is in comparison with the other occupants. Having points increases the likelihood of the occupant winning in a lottery. The prizes in the lottery consist of three Amazon gift cards.
We have installed a Lutron2 system for the control of the lights in the oﬃce. This system allows us to precisely control the lighting level of each of the lights in the oﬃce. We use it to set the default lighting level as well as implement the average of the votes each time the occupants change their lighting preferences.
We have divided the oﬃce into ﬁve lighting zones and each zone has four occupants. Thus, there are 20 occupants who participate in the social game. In addition, we have two heating, ventalating and air conditioning (HVAC) zones and each zone has ten occupants (see ﬁgure 1(a)).
We have developed an online platform in which the occupants can login and participate in the game. This includes the ability for the occupants to vote on their lighting and heating, ventilating and air conditioning (HVAC) preferences as well as view all occupant point balances and all occupant consumption patterns including the ability to monitor individual occupant plug-load consumption. Figure 1(b) shows a display of how an occupant can select their lighting preference and Figure 1(c) shows a sample of how occupants can see their point balance.
In this paper, we focus on a game focused on encouraging occupants to select lower lighting settings in exchange for a chance to win in a lottery. An occupant’s vote is for the lighting level in their zone as well as for neighboring zones. The lighting setting that is implemented is the average of all the votes.
Each day when an occupant logs into the online platform the ﬁrst time after they enter the oﬃce, they are considered present for the remainder of the day. There is a default lighting setting. An occupant can leave the lighting setting as the default after logging in or they can change it to some other value in the interval [0, 100] depending on their preferences.
Some of the energy savings we achieve is due to the default setting and some due to the social game. We are currently conducting experiments to determine
2 http://www.lutron.com/en-US/Pages/default.aspx
8

1.4 Games’ Interface / Web Portal
Participants of our experiment (20 persons in total) have access to an online social game platform, which is a website that is password protected, and only the research group along with the participants have access to it. Each participant has a personal username in order to login to the web portal. This website, display the energy usage of all participants as well as to the shared energy sources light and temperature levels in 406 Cory Hall. Also, the website gives to each participant information about his / her total points along with instantaneous control of the shared lights / temperature.
Below there are figures that show the web portal of our experiment.

Figure 1: Map view of the office along with the light / temperature zones
(a)

(b)

Figure 8: Live information for the point balance of each participant for each game
(c)

In figure 8 each participant can see lively his / her point balance for every game. Also, he can see his grand point total so as to know how much chances does he have in the game. Moreover, in the left upper corner there is a yellow coin that it is randomly appeared every 40 to 70 minutes and gives to each participant some bonus points if he pushes that. So, this is one way for us to see if an individual cares about his / her points and if he
Fig. 1. (a) Display of HVAC and lighting zoloonkseatshi.s / Zones her total point A-B balance. are the ﬁve lighting zones

and zones F-G are the two HVAC zones. (b) Display of how occupants can log their

lighting vote. (c) Display of an occupant’s point balance.

how much savings is due to the social game. It is the building managers duty to ensure that the occupants are satisﬁed (via appropriate lighting level) and the building is operating in an energy eﬃcient way. We believe Figure 9: Pie chart of the total amount of coin htitshat through optimal design of the incentives, we will be able to achieve greater energy savings than would be possible by only adjusting the default lighting setting. We leave this for future work.
4 Results
In this section, we report the results on the savings acheived through the game, the utility learning problem as well as simulation of the estimated utilities.
We use the data collected over the period from Mar. 3, 2014 to Jun. 5, 2014 when occupants have regular working schedules in the oﬃce. The baseline lighting, xb, is 90%, which is the standard lighting level prior to the beginning of the experiment. Throughout this period, we have changed the default lighting level three times (see Table 1). We divide each day into four regions based on the

Period

Default Level

March 3–April 10 20 %

April 11–May 1

10 %

May 2–May 23

60 %

May 24 – June 5 90 %

Table 1. Default levels for four periods during the experiment. By changing the default

setting to 90% we isolate the savings due to the social game from those achieved by

changing the default setting.

outside lighting in Berkeley during the summer, namely from 5 to 10am (Dawn), 9

10am to 5pm (Daylight), 5pm to 8pm (Dusk), and 8pm to the next day 5am (Night). The data is further processed by taking the average of votes in each region of the day for each user.
4.1 Savings First, we highlight the savings achieved as a result of instituting the social game. In Figure 2, we report the savings per day in KWh for the four periods in which the default varied. We remark that in the last period in which the default setting was set to 90% (which is the baseline line setting), we still acheived a savings of 3KWh on average per day. Using the mean savings for each of the periods and a rate of $0.12/KWh, we estimate that we saved $73. In addition, over the period of 101 days that the experiment was conducted the oﬃce consumed 2,185 KWh for lighting and we saved approximately 601KWh. That is a 27.5% reduction in energy. This savings is just due to a change in lighting usage behavior for one small portion of a building.
Our platform has the capability of including HVAC and plug-load in addition to lighting. We plan to implement a similar social game in Singapore and we expect much greater savings. This current experiment shows that a social game is a viable way to engage building occupants and induce behavioral change toward more energy eﬃcient behaviors.
Fig. 2. Savings acheived per day (KWh). The mean savings over the four periods in which the default varied. Notice that in the period during which the default setting was at the baseline, there is still a savings of around 3KWh per day.
10

4.2 Estimation
The estimation proposed is Section 2.1 is performed for each user in each day interval and default lighting interval. Only true votes, not the default votes, are considered. We apply the bootstrapping method to obtain the empirical distribution of θi for i ∈ {1, ..., 20} by randomly sampling a subset from the data [7]. The mean and standard deviation for the users which are the most active are reported in Table 2.

Table 2. Estimated utility parameter for selected set of active users. A, B, C, D stand for the periods Dawn, Daylight, Dusk, and Night respectively. The standard deviation is indicated inside the parentheses and the mean is given outside of the parentheses. Blank indicates that the occupant did not vote during that period. Hence, they have no estimated utility. Occupants’ whose number is in boldface have won at least once in the lottery. Note that numbers marked with * indicate that we do not have reliable estimates due to limited data.

Active users (selected)

2

6

8

10

14

20

A .26(.25) 4657(481) 3671(126) 4658(0*) 3054(141) 3857(110)

Default 20 B .41(.09) 2932(99) 3386(73) 271(307) 3350(96) 691(473) C .00(.01) 1808(1008) 3290(194) 1220(0*) 3332(164) 1222(259)

D .00(.00) 822(1465) 3700(461) 3420(295) 3756(575) 1095(285)

A .96(.39) 294(759) 2923(215) 2446(0*) 2971(508) 195(335)

Default 10 B .24(.60) 833(796) 2847(320) 2042(0*) 3219(339) 258(339) C .07(.12) 0(0*) 2924(224) 3485(0*) 670(441) 643(469)

D .09(.25) 625(816) 3542(474) 3305(0*) 1793(1187) 824(534)

A .28(.59) 469(1717) 6790(1267)

3180(827) 504(940)

Default 60 B .07(.19) 1062(1135) 5741(734) 6327(199) 6180(881) 104(484) C .00(.00) 1146(1927) 6166(502) 3752(0*) 7856(1728) 588(903)

D .12(.18) 3947(2434) 6670(0*) 5296(0*) 3628(3394) 881(4)

A .01(.01) 9045(1562) 7835(2465)

3333(0*)

Default 90 B .00(.01) 7624(1699) 9479(926) C .02(.03) 8962(947) 8761(983)

1923(2010) 3333(0*)

D

5000(461) 5000(0*)

We remark that occupant 2 has a very low mean for the parameter θ2 as compared to the other active occupants. By examining the ground truth values (red dots) in Figure 3, we see that occupant 2 often votes for a lighting setting around 60-70%. On the other hand, in Figure 4, we can see the ground truth of occupant 14 who often votes for a lighting setting of 0%. This player is more aggressive than occupant 2 and this behavior is reﬂected in the mean of the estimate for parameter θ14.
4.3 Simulation To capture the working schedules of each user, we employ a simple probabilistic model which determines the probability of individual user being absent, pai bsent,
11

Fig. 3. One day ahead prediction by the Nash equilibrium algorithm for occupant 2. Red: ground truth, i.e. occupant 2’s actual votes. We sample from the distributions across the events absent, active, default for each occupant and simulate the game with the set of active and default players. We repeat this 20 times for each day and generate a distribution for the predictions of each occupant’s behavior. Blue: mean of prediction. Green: prediction within 1 standard deviation of the prediction mean. Gaps in the plots indicate that the occupant was not present on that day.
present and playing default, ppi resent, default, and present and actively playing, ppi resent, active. By assumption the sample space Ω includes the above three outcomes, and the probability mass functions should sum to unity. This probability is estimated by pEi = NNi,iE , where E is the event of one of the three outcomes, Ni,E is the number of event E for user i, and Ni is the number of total events.
For the prediction of the next day lighting votes, we randomly sample from this distribution to determine the set of active, default, and absent users, then obtain a local Nash equilibrium for them. This step is performed 20 times for each day to predict the distribution of votes, as shown in Figure 5.
As can be seen, the Nash equilibrium captures substantial variations in the data. We also compared the results of prediction with the autoregressive integrated moving average (ARIMA) model [9], constant model which uses the default lighting for prediction, and the persistent model which uses the previous day value for prediction. The mean squared errors (MSE) of the models are summarized in Table 3. The Nash equilibrium achieves a prediction that is the most accurate as compared with other models, which presents it favorably for leaders in the Stackelberg game to design optimal incentives to motivate energy saving behaviors. Indeed in the Stackelberg framework, the leader (building manager) assumes that the agents (occupants) are utility maximizers and play
12

Fig. 4. One day ahead prediction by the Nash equilibrium algorithm for occupant 14. Red: ground truth, i.e. occupant 14’s actual votes. We sample from the distributions across the events absent, active, default for each occupant and simulate the game with the set of active and default players. We repeat this 20 times for each day and generate a distribution for the predictions of each occupant’s behavior. Blue: mean of prediction. Green: prediction within 1 standard deviation of the prediction mean. Gaps in the plots indicate that the occupant was not present on that day.

Nash. Hence, we will be able to integrate our estimation algorithm into an online algorithm for designing incentives.

Table 3. Mean square error (MSE) of four algorithms that predict the one day ahead occupant behavior over the period of study (101 days): ARIMA(1,0,1) (we use one autoregressive term, zero nonseasonal diﬀerences, and one lagged forecast error in the prediction equation) [9], Nash, a model which uses the default as the prediction, and a model which uses occupants’ previous votes as the prediction. Nash out performs each of the other methods.

Model ARIMA(1,0,1) Nash Constant Persistent

MSE

13.92 12.46 16.96 13.42

5 Discussion and Future Work
We have designed and implemented a social game for inducing building occupants to behave in an energy eﬃcient manner. We presented data and results pertaining to the game in which occupants select their lighting preferences and
13

Fig. 5. One day ahead prediction by the Nash equilibrium algorithm for the average implemented lighting setting in the oﬃce each day. We sampled from the distribution over the events absent, active, default for each of the players and simulated Nash given the sample of active and default players. We repeated this 20 times for each day and generated a distribution for the prediction of the implemented lighting setting. Red: ground truth, i.e. the average lighting setting that is implemented per day. Blue: mean of prediction as given by the Nash simulation. Green: prediction within 1 standard deviation of the prediction mean.
win points depending on how far their vote is from the baseline lighting setting and proportional to other occupants’ votes distances from the baseline. As a result, the occupants are interacting in a competitive environment which we model as a non-cooperative game. We show that we get signiﬁcant savings as compared to usage prior to the implementation of the social game. This savings is due to both a change in the default setting as well as due to the incentives oﬀered in the social game.
We described the experimental set-up which includes an online platform for the implementation of the social game as well as the use of a Lutron lighting system for percise control of the lighting setting. Our platform also includes the ability to implement a social game centered around HVAC settings as well as occupant plug-load consumption. We leave exploring these additional features as future work.
We have formulated the problem of estimating the occupant utility functions as a convex optimization problem and estimated occupant utilities in a 20 player social game. We simulated the game using the estimated utility functions and showed that our model is a good predictor for occupant behavior. It out performs a number of other estimation techniques including ARIMA.
14

There are several ways in which we believe we can improve our estimate of the utility functions of the occupants. We did not consider the environmental noise such as variations in natural light. We instead used a heuristic to capture this variation by breaking the day into intervals in which the natural light entering the oﬃce is most consistent. In addition, we did not consider any information on the occupants’ schedules or location in the oﬃce with respect to windows. We could incorporte these aspects into our estimation as priors on the parameters of the occupants utility function or as a noise process in the estimated behavior model. We leave this as future work.
In the experiments used for this paper, we selected the value of ρ based on heuristics. Our goal is to design ρ in an optimal way. We can leverage the fact that we have modeled occupants as utility maximizers who play in a noncooperative game by considering the design of ρ by the building manager. In particular, we can model this interaction between the building manager and the occupants as a Stackelberg game. In this framework, the building manager would perform an online estimation of the occupants’ utility functions and update ρ accordingly [20]. We believe that by optimizing the incentive ρ, we can achieve greater savings. We are currently implementing such a scheme in our experimental platform.
References
1. Albadi, M., El-Saadany, E.: A summary of demand response in electricity markets. Electric Power Systems Research 78(11), 1989 – 1996 (2008)
2. Arrow, K.J., Hurwicz, L., Uzawa, H.: Constraint qualiﬁcations in maximization problems. Naval Research Logistics Quarterly 8(2), 175–191 (1961)
3. Aswani, A., Master, N., Taneja, J., Smith, V., Krioukov, A., Culler, D., Tomlin, C.: Identifying models of HVAC systems using semi-parametric regression. In: Proceedings of the American Control Conference (2012)
4. Bestick, A., Ratliﬀ, L.J., Yan, P., Bajcsy, R., Sastry, S.S.: An inverse correlated equilibrium framework for utility learning in multiplayer, noncooperative settings. In: Proceedings of the 2nd ACM international conference on High conﬁdence networked systems. pp. 9–16. ACM (2013)
5. Boman, M., Davidsson, P., Skarmeas, N., Clark, K., Gustavsson, R.: Energy saving and added customer value in intelligent buildings. In: Third International Conference on the Practical Application of Intelligent Agents and Multi-Agent Technology. pp. 505–517 (1998)
6. Bourgeois, D., Reinhart, C., Macdonald, I.: Adding advanced behavioural models in whole building energy simulation: A study on the total energy impact of manual and automated lighting control. Energy and Buildings 38(7), 814 – 823 (2006), special Issue on Daylighting Buildings
7. Efron, B., Tibshirani, R.J.: An introduction to the bootstrap, vol. 57. CRC press (1994)
8. Fl˚am, S.D.: Solving non-cooperative games by continuous subgradient projection methods. In: System Modelling and Optimization, pp. 115–123. Springer (1990)
9. Hannan, E.J., Deistler, M.: The statistical theory of linear systems, vol. 70. SIAM (2012)
15

10. Keshavarz, A., Wang, Y., Boyd, S.: Imputing a convex objective function. In: IEEE International Symposium on Intelligent Control. pp. 613–619. IEEE (2011)
11. Lee, M., O.Aslam, Foster, B., Kathan, D., Kwok, J., Medearis, L., Palmer, R., Sporborg, P., Tita, M.: Assessment of demand response and advanced metering. Tech. rep., Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (2013)
12. Lovett, T., Gabe-Thomas, E., Natarajan, S., O’Neill, E., Padget, J.: ’just enough’ sensing to enliten: A preliminary demonstration of sensing strategy for the ’energy literacy through an intelligent home energy advisor’ (enliten) project. In: Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference on Future Energy Systems. pp. 279–280. e-Energy ’13, ACM, New York, NY, USA (2013), http://doi.acm.org/ 10.1145/2487166.2487206
13. Ma, Y., Anderson, G., Borrelli, F.: A distributed predictive control approach to building temperature regulation. In: American Control Conference (ACC). pp. 2089–2094. IEEE (2011)
14. Mathieu, J., Dyson, M., Callaway, D., Rosenfeld, A.: Using residential electric loads for fast demand response: The potential resource and revenues, the costs, and policy recommendations. In: ACEEE Summer Study on Energy Eﬃciency in Buildings (2012)
15. Mathieu, J.L., Price, P.N., Kiliccote, S., Piette, M.A.: Quantifying changes in building electricity use, with application to demand response. IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, 2(3), 507–518 (2011)
16. McQuade, J.: A system approach to high performance buildings. United Technologies Corporation, Tech. Rep (2009)
17. Merugu, D., Prabhakar, B.S., Rama, N.: An incentive mechanism for decongesting the roads: A pilot program in bangalore. In: Proceedings of ACM NetEcon Workshop (2009)
18. Oldewurtel, F., Parisio, A., Jones, C., Morari, M., Gyalistras, D., Gwerder, M., Stauch, V., Lehmann, B., Wirth, K.: Energy eﬃcient building climate control using stochastic model predictive control and weather predictions. In: American Control Conference (ACC), 2010. pp. 5100–5105. IEEE (2010)
19. Ratliﬀ, L.J., Burden, S.A., Sastry, S.S.: Characterization and computation of local nash equilibria in continuous games. In: Proceedings of the 51st Annual Allerton Conference on Communication, Control, and Computing (2013)
20. Ratliﬀ, L.J., Dong, R., Ohlsson, H., Sastry, S.S.: Incentive design and utility learning via energy disaggregation. In: Proceedings of the 19th World Congress of the International Federation of Automatic Control (2014)
21. Roozbehani, M., Dahleh, M., Mitter, S.: Dynamic pricing and stabilization of supply and demand in modern electric power grids. In: First IEEE International Conference on Smart Grid Communications (SmartGridComm),. pp. 543 –548 (oct 2010)
22. Rosen, J.B.: Existence and uniqueness of equilibrium points for concave n-person games. Econometrica 33(3), 520 (1965)
23. Swenson, A.: Lighting in commercial buildings. Tech. rep., U.S. Energy Infomation Administration (2009), http://www.eia.gov/consumption/commercial/ data/archive/cbecs/cbecs2003/lighting/lighting1.html
16

