Competitive Statistical Estimation with Strategic Data Sources
Tyler Westenbroek, Student Member, IEEE, Roy Dong, Lillian J. Ratliff, Member, IEEE, and S. Shankar Sastry, Fellow, IEEE

arXiv:1904.12768v1 [cs.GT] 29 Apr 2019

Abstract—In recent years, data has played an increasingly important role in the economy as a good in its own right. In many settings, data aggregators cannot directly verify the quality of the data they purchase, nor the effort exerted by data sources when creating the data. Recent work has explored mechanisms to ensure that the data sources share high quality data with a single data aggregator, addressing the issue of moral hazard. Oftentimes, there is a unique, socially efﬁcient solution.
In this paper, we consider data markets where there is more than one data aggregator. Since data can be cheaply reproduced and transmitted once created, data sources may share the same data with more than one aggregator, leading to free-riding between data aggregators. This coupling can lead to non-uniqueness of equilibria and social inefﬁciency. We examine a particular class of mechanisms that have received study recently in the literature, and we characterize all the generalized Nash equilibria of the resulting data market. We show that, in contrast to the single-aggregator case, there is either inﬁnitely many generalized Nash equilibria or none. We also provide necessary and sufﬁcient conditions for all equilibria to be socially inefﬁcient. In our analysis, we identify the components of these mechanisms which give rise to these undesirable outcomes, showing the need for research into mechanisms for competitive settings with multiple data purchasers and sellers.
I. INTRODUCTION
D ATA has increasingly seen a role in the economy as an important good. As an input to machine learning algorithms, data can not only create new products and innovations, but also be used to redesign business strategies and processes. As the demand for data increases, we have seen the formation of data aggregators, who collate data for either use or resale. A fundamental information asymmetry arises between data aggregators and data sources: how can aggregators verify the quality of the data they purchase from data sources?
In particular, data sources often incur an effort cost to obtain high quality data. For example, devices require maintenance and upkeep to ensure accurate measurements, portable sensors need to use their limited energy resources to collect and transmit data, and human agents may need to be compensated to properly perform a desired task. As such, if a data aggregator wants a high quality data point, they must appropriately compensate the data source. Furthermore, this problem is complicated by the fact that the data aggregators
T. Westenbroek and S. S. Sastry are with the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, 94707, USA, email: {westenbroekt,sastry}@eecs.berkeley.edu.
R. Dong is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign, IL, 61820, USA, e-mail: roydong@illinois.edu.
L. J. Ratliff is with the Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, 98195, USA, e-mail: ratliffl@uw.edu.
This work is partially funded by NSF CNS:1656873.

cannot observe the effort exerted, and only the data received. As such, the payments must be calculated from the data sets alone, with no knowledge of the effort exerted or noise levels of data points. This problem has led to the design of a variety of mechanisms to ensure data sources provide quality data, which we will outline in more detail in Section II.
The contribution of this paper is the study of the data market that forms when multiple data aggregators share the same pool of data sources. In particular, we note that data is non-rivalrous, in the sense that it can be cheaply copied and shared with multiple data aggregators. Since a data aggregator does not ‘consume’ the good after purchasing it, data sources will have an incentive to share the same data with as many aggregators as are willing to pay. We show that the nonrivalrous nature of data introduces a coupling between data buyers: when a data aggregator incentivizes a data source to produce high quality data, other data aggregators beneﬁt. In particular, this coupling leads to undesirable properties of the equilibrium. In many single-aggregator formulations, equilibria are unique and there is no social inefﬁciency. In contrast, the multiple-aggregator case leads to a multiplicity of equilibria, and social inefﬁciencies across all equilibria.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we discuss the related literature and contextualize our contributions. In Section III, we introduce our model for data sources, data aggregators, and their interactions in the data market. In Section IV, we characterize the generalized Nash equilibria in the data market, and identify necessary and sufﬁcient conditions for social inefﬁency. In Section V, we extend the results to cases where data sources do not share their data with all data aggregators. Finally, we close with ﬁnal remarks in Section VI.
II. RELATED LITERATURE
In recent years, there has been a quickly growing body of literature on models for data exchange and data markets. Broadly speaking, the existing literature can be broken down by two categories: models with a single data purchaser and single data source, and models with a single data purchaser and multiple data sources.
In the ﬁrst category, we ﬁnd a class of models which study a single data purchaser and a single data source. These works focus on the game theoretic interactions and information states between the two agents. In particular, these works consider the strategies arising from direct signals, actions, and payments, rather than indirect coupling that can arise from multiple sources or purchasers. Some of these papers feature multiple data sources, but these are ultimately separable into a collection of single-source models, and, at their core, focus

on the direct interactions between buyers and sellers of data. In [1], optimal mechanisms for a single data source to sell to a single buyer are developed using a signaling framework. The authors of [2] design a menu of prices for different data qualities, employing a screening framework. In [3], the authors consider a single aggregator and single source, and show how repeated interactions with noisy veriﬁcation allow for mechanisms which elicit costly effort from a data source. A single data source charging data purchasers for queries about customer preferences is studied in [4].
In the second category, there are a class of models which study a single data purchaser with multiple data sources. These works focus on capturing how the data supplied by one data source affects another. In [5], the authors consider a single data aggregator and multiple data sources, and show how robustness of the sample median provides protection against strategic data sources. In [6], the authors consider a single data aggregator and multiple data sources in a setting with veriﬁable data, and allow the data and the cost of revealing data to be arbitrarily correlated.
There is also a new body of work in the single-aggregator, multiple-source case, using peer prediction mechanisms, ﬁrst introduced in [7]. These techniques often use scoring techniques to evaluate the ‘goodness’ of received data, and often examine classiﬁcation tasks. In [8], [9], the authors develop mechanisms for eliciting the truth in crowdsourcing applications, while [10]–[12] consider theoretical extensions to strengthen the original results of [7], all in the context of a single aggregator. In [13], the authors consider a classiﬁcation problem with a single aggregator and multiple data sources, which extends the classic peer prediction results by exploiting correlations between the queries and query responses.
A parallel literature considers similar ideas in the regression domain. These works design general payment mechanisms, by which a central data aggregator may incentivize data sources to exert the effort necessary to produce and report readings which are deemed to be of high quality, with respect to the estimation task the aggregator is performing. The roots of these approaches can be traced least as far back as VCG mechanisms, a set of seminal results in mechanism design [14]. Indeed, numerous approaches for deciding payments based on the actions of other agents have been proposed [15]. Here, we again see attention given to crowdsourcing [16].
Several recent papers [3], [17]–[21] investigate new directions in this domain. In cases where, without the ability to directly determine the effort exerted by data sources, data buyers must design incentive mechanisms based solely on the data available to them. In [17], whose approach we extend here, the authors develop a mechanism which a data aggregator can use to precisely set the level of effort a collection of data sources exert when producing data. A similar mechanism is explored in [18]. Extensions are considered wherein data sources form coalitions [19], or where aggregators assess the quality of readings using a trusted data source [20]. Meanwhile, [21] and [3] investigate dynamic settings where data sources are repeatedly queried.
Our work is closest in spirit to the literature studying regression problems with multiple data sources, with our key

contribution being the presence of multiple data aggregators that are coupled in their costs and actions. To our knowledge, this is one of the ﬁrst papers which considers multiple data aggregators and multiple data sources simultaneously. In particular, we simultaneously model coupling between data aggregators in their cost functions, coupling in the payments to the same pool of data sources, and coupling between data sources due to payments that depend on their peers’ data.
We suppose all data aggregators are trying to estimate the same function and share the same pool of data sources. Additionally, we assume each data aggregator has already chosen an estimator, and now must determine how to issue payments to have low estimation error with their exogenously ﬁxed estimator. Our model builds heavily on the model introduced in [17], which featured a single data aggregator. Our contribution is an extension that models cases with multiple data aggregators. For consistency, we will refer to data purchasers as data aggregators, and data sellers as data sources.
Furthermore, the work in the paper is a signiﬁcant extension of our prior work [22] where we considered strategic data sources with a speciﬁc exponential function mapping effort to query response quality. In the present work, we characterize equilibria and the price of anarchy for a much broader class of games between data buyers where the data sources’ effort functions can be any non-negative, strictly decreasing, convex, and twice continuously differentiable function. The characterization we provide considers both bounded and unbounded feasible effort sets for the data sources.
III. DATA MARKET PRELIMINARIES
In this section, we outline the models for data sources, data aggregators, and the strategic interactions between them.
At a high level, each data aggregator collects data from data sources to construct an estimate of a given function. In exchange for this data, the data aggregator issues incentives to the data sources. The data aggregators have three terms in their cost function: 1) an estimation error term, which rewards the data aggregator for constructing a better estimate; 2) a competition term, which penalizes when other data aggregators have higher quality estimates; 3) a payment term, which is the cost incurred issuing incentives.
Each data source is able to produce a noisy sample of the desired function. The data sources can exert effort to reduce the variance of the data sample, and we assume the data sources are effort-averse, i.e. data sources will prefer to exert less effort, unless they are provided incentive by the aggregators. As such, the data sources have two terms in their utility function: 1) an incentive term, which rewards payments received; 2) an effort term, which penalizes effort exerted.
The level of effort exerted and the variance of the data are not known by the data aggregator; this private information gives rise to moral hazard. One of the problems for the aggregator is the task of designing incentives which depend only on the information available to them. Another important nuance is that data is non-rivalrous; thus, when a data source produces a higher-quality data sample, all the aggregators which receive this data beneﬁt.

In order to simplify the initial introduction of our model, we will ﬁrst assume that each data source provides data to all the aggregators in the data market, and receives payment from all aggregators as well. In Section V, we will outline how our results change when this assumption is removed.

A. Overview
More formally, let S = {1, . . . , N } be the index set of strategic data sources, and let B = {1, . . . , M } be the index set of strategic data aggregators. Each data aggregator desires to construct an estimate for a given function f : D → R, where D is a feature space. Practically, one may think of D as a set of features the data aggregators are capable of observing, while the mapping f encapsulates the relationship between the observable features and the outcome of interest.
Each data source s ∈ S is able to produce a noisy sample ys of f at the ﬁxed point xs ∈ D. The point xs is common knowledge among all data sources and aggregators. The variance of ys is proportional to the effort exerted by data source s to produce the reading. Each data source s is characterized by an effort-to-variance function σs2 : Es → R≥0, where Es represents the set of feasible efforts that data source s can exert. When data source s exerts effort es ∈ Es, they produce the data point:

ys(es) = f (xs) + s(es)

(1)

Here, s(es) is a random variable with mean 0 and variance σs2(es). The function σs2 is common knowledge among all data sources and aggregators. However, while the function σs2 is known, the effort exerted es is private. This means that the actual variance of ys, namely σs2(es), is also private information of s. We will delve into assumptions in the data
source model in greater detail in Section III-B.
Now, suppose a data aggregator is granted access to a data
set {(xs, ys)}s∈S. At this point, the data aggregator b ∈ B processes this data to construct an estimate for f . In exchange for this data set, the data aggregator issues payment pbs(y) to data source s for each s ∈ S. Here, y = (y1, . . . , yN ) denotes the data given to each member of B. Note that the payment
to s from b depends not only on the data supplied by s, but
rather depends on all data available to b. The data aggregator then incurs loss Lb(pb, e), which will
depend on pb = (pbi )i∈S , the payments issued, as well as e = (ei)i∈S , the effort exerted by the data sources. We will formalize the data aggregator in greater detail in Section III-C.
The interaction of the data market proceeds in three stages.
1) Aggregators declare incentives: Each data aggregator b ∈ B commits to a payment contract pb = (pbi )i∈S . The payments will depend on the data y shared with b, as
well as the common knowledge information x = (xi)i∈S and functions σ2 = (σi2)i∈S . 2) Sources exert effort, realize and share data: In response to pb, each data source s chooses an effort es ∈ Es. Then, the random variable ys is realized according to (1). The data ys is shared with each data aggregator. Note that s has control over ys only through es. In other words, the

data source chooses the quality of data they generate, but cannot arbitrarily manipulate the reported value of ys. 3) Aggregators construct estimates, issue payments: Each data buyer b constructs their estimate fˆb, issues payments pb to the data sources, and incurs loss Lb.
For convenience, we include a table summarizing the nota-
tion throughout this paper in Table I.

B. Strategic Data Sources
As mentioned previously, each data source s ∈ S has their own feature vector xs ∈ D, and samples the function f at this point. We may also refer to xs as a query throughout the text, and ys as the query response for data source s. The data source s is characterized by the effort-to-variance function σs2 : Es → R≥0. We assume 0 ∈ Es so that each data source may exert no effort in producing her reading if she desires.

Assumption 1. For each s ∈ S, the set Es ⊂ R≥0 is a closed, connected set and contains 0.

Assumption 1 means that we consider two cases:
(i) Es = [0, ∞), i.e. the data sources maximum allowed effort is unbounded.
(ii) Es = [0, ems ax] for some 0 < ems ax < ∞, i.e. the data sources maximum allowed effort is bounded.
Imposing an upper-bound on the amount of a effort a data source can exert can be used to model constraints such as hardware limitations. As we shall see in Section IV, the imposition of such constraints can drastically affect equilibrium behavior in the data market.
Once the data source s exerts effort es ∈ Es, they produce the data point ys according to (1). Again, we note that the data source only controls the effort level es. They can only indirectly control ys through es, and cannot report arbitrary values as their data. We also impose the assumption that the noise in the data is independent across data sources.

Assumption 2. For each s ∈ S, s(es) is a random variable with mean 0 and variance σs2(es). Furthermore, the random
variables { s(es)}s∈S are independent.

Both xs and the function function σs2 are common knowledge, but the effort es and σs2(es), the actual variance of ys,

are private.

For convenience, we let E = E1 × · · · × EN be the joint

effort

set

and

let

σ2

=

(σ

2 1

,

.

.

.

,

σ

2 N

)

be

the

tuple

of

effort-

to-variance functions. We make the following assumptions on

the effort-to-variance mappings σ2.

Assumption 3. For each data source s ∈ S, the mapping σs : Es → R≥0, which is the square root of σs2, is (i) strictly decreasing, (ii) convex, and (iii) twice continuously
differentiable.

The assumptions correspond to the variance of the estimate
generated by data source s decreasing in the effort exerted,
with decreasing marginal returns. Using the notation ps = (pjs)j∈B, we model each data
source with the following utility function:

us(es, ps) = E j∈B pjs(y(e)) − es

(2)

where the expectation is with respect to the randomness in y, the data generated by the data sources upon exerting effort e.1 Note the form of (2) implies that the data sources are riskneutral and effort-adverse. Additionally, the form of (2) also implies the effort es can be normalized to be comparable to the payments. We note that the timing of the game implies that data sources must commit to an effort level ex-ante.
Thus, in the second stage of the game, data source s has knowledge of the payment contracts (pb)b∈B, and chooses es to maximize their us(es, ps), deﬁned by (2). However, since the utility of each data source depends on the effort exerted by the other data sources, the payments (pb)b∈B induce a game between the data sources. In Section III-F we will fully characterize this game for the particular class of incentives we introduce in Section III-D.
C. Strategic Data Aggregators
The primary objective of each aggregator is to construct a low-variance estimate for the function f . We adopt the following formal deﬁnition for an estimator.
Deﬁnition 1 (Estimator [17]). Let H be a family of functions f : D → R. An estimator for H takes as input a collection X = (xi, yi)Ni=1 of examples (xi, yi) ∈ D × R and produces an estimated function fˆX ∈ H.
As an example, H may be the class of linear functions f : Rn → R, in which case one may produce an estimated function fˆX ∈ H of f via linear regression.
Each data aggregator b ∈ B constructs his estimate for f from the class of functions Hb, using the readings X = (xs, ys)s∈S . We let fˆXb ∈ Hb denote the estimate that aggregator b constructs based on the readings they receive.2
Each data aggregator’s estimator is given, ﬁxed, and common knowledge among all agents. In other words, this means that, for each data aggregator, the process by which a data set is turned into an estimate is exogenous. We focus on the design of incentives once each buyer has chosen an estimator.
First, we introduce some restrictions on the class of estimators allowed. The following assumption is required for us to be able to consider the contribution of data source s to reducing aggregator b’s estimation cost. Also, note that the functions {hb}b∈B will be non-negative by construction.
Assumption 4. We assume the estimator for each b ∈ B is separable, in the following sense [17]. There exists a function hb such that for all queries x, distributions F over D, and variances σ2 of the reported estimates y at queries
1For simplicity and as a ﬁrst-step analysis, we assume that the data sources only care about the payments received from the aggregator, and are indifferent to which aggregators they share their data with. An interesting and practical extension would be to consider the case where the data sources’ utility functions are aggregator-dependent. This could arise when data sources trust different aggregators differently, or over privacy concerns.
2In general, aggregators need not ﬁt models of the same type—e.g., one data aggregator may choose to generate their estimate via linear regression, while another ﬁts a polynomial of higher degree. Different estimator types across data aggregators may be used to encapsulate competitive advantages one has over another.

x = (xi)ki=1 in the dataset X = (x, y):

k

E fˆXb (x∗) − f (x∗) 2 =

hb

(x

i

,

x,

F

)

σ

2 i

(3)

i=1

Here, the expectation is taken across the randomness in X , as well as across x∗ ∼ F .

For brevity, we will also deﬁne the function gb as follows:

gb(x, F, σ2) =

k i=1

hb

(xi

,

x,

F

)σi2

(4)

Let −b = B \ {b} denote the index set of aggregators excluding b and let p−b = (pj)j∈−b be the payments of all aggregators excluding b. Aggregator b constructs payments so
as to minimize:

Lb(pb, e) = E

fˆb (x∗) − f (x∗) 2
X

−

ζb fˆj (x∗) − f (x∗) 2

j∈−b j X

(5)

+ ηb s∈S pbs(y(e))

As in (3), the expectation in (5) is taken with respect to x∗ ∼ Fb and the randomness in the query responses y. The distribution Fb weighs the importance data aggregator b places on accurately estimating f for different query points x ∈ D.
The scalars ζjb ∈ [0, 1] parameterize the level of competition between aggregators b and j. When ζjb = 0, aggregator b is indifferent to the success of j’s estimation; b interacts with
j entirely through the incentives issued to the data sources. We note that, even when ζjb = 0 for all j and b, we can still see degeneracies and social inefﬁciency arise, since data aggregators will still be coupled through the data sources.3 The parameter ηb > 0 denotes a conversion between dollar
amounts allocated by the payment functions and the utility
generated by the quality of the various estimates that are
constructed. We make the assumption that aggregator b has
knowledge of what estimator every other data aggregator plans to use, as well as the weighting distributions.4

D. Structure of Payment Contracts

Throughout this paper, we will assume a particular form for

the payment contracts the aggregators offer to the data sources.

Similar to previous notation, we let −s = S \ {s}. For a given b ∈ B and s ∈ S we assume that pbs is of the form:

2

b(yb) = cbs − abs ysb − fˆXb (xs)

(6)

ps

−s

Here, abs and cbs are nonnegative scalars. Also, X−s = (x−s, y−s) denotes b’s data set excluding s. Namely x−s is the data features for all sources excluding s and y−s = (yi)i∈−s is the query responses to aggregator b, excluding s.

3This is a stylized formulation of how competition can affect different data aggregators, but we see interesting results arise even in this simple model. In the future, we hope to consider more extensive models of competition for data aggregators.
4This is a fairly strong assumption given that competing data aggregators are unlikely to inform their competitors how they intend to process the data supplied by the sources. Our work isolates how coupling between aggregators through data sources affect the data market; an interesting avenue for future work is to consider extensions with different information sets, and characterize the existence and severity of market inefﬁciencies in these various situations.

Note that these payments do not directly depend on the level of effort that any of the data sources exert, since the data aggregators do not have a means to directly observe these values. Rather, the payment to source s from aggregator b depends on the b’s best estimate for f (xs) excluding s’s data, namely, fˆXb −s (xs). The payments only depend on the data reported to them, and can be calculated by the aggregator.
Similar payment contracts are common in the literature [17], [18], [20], in part because of their intuitive structure. The aggregator constructs an unbiased estimate of what data source s should report, and this estimate is not inﬂuenced by the data of s. This estimate is used to overcome the problem of moral hazard: all data sources are appropriately incentivized to reduce the variance of their reported data accordingly.
Given this payment structure, each data aggregator’s choice of payment contracts reduces to choosing parameters (cb, ab) where cb = (cbi )i∈S ∈ RN and ab = (abi )i∈S ∈ RN .
In the single aggregator case (when M = |B| = 1), it was shown in [17] that payments of the form in (6) induce a game between the data sources for which there is a unique dominant strategy equilibrium. That is, for each collection of parameters (cbi )i∈S and (abi )i∈S , the data sources each exert a unique level of effort. The authors develop and algorithm by which the single aggregator may select these parameters such that (i) data sources are incentivized to exert any level of effort that the aggregator desires, and (ii) data sources are compensated at exactly the value of their effort, i.e. E[ps(y(e))] = es.
This paper’s contribution is the study of how pricing schemes of this form perform in the more general case where there is more than one data aggregator (when M = |B| > 1), and data aggregators may compete with each other. The goal is to model multiple aggregators as strategic decision-makers in competition, and understand the data market where these agents interact. Thus, while prior work captured moral hazard, we extend this model to capture competition and the nonrivalrous nature of data.
E. Formulation of Aggregator Optimization Problem
As mentioned previously, the aggregators hope to minimize their costs, as given in (5). They do so by choosing the parameters (cb, ab). In this section, we will describe the aggregator’s optimization problem in more detail, and specify constraints that the parameter choice must satisfy.
The ﬁrst constraint is individual rationality (IR). Individual rationality requires that each data source’s utility is nonnegative ex-ante [23].5 This ensures that rational data sources are willing to exert effort to produce the data. The second constraint is non-negative payments from each data aggregator. Given that there are multiple aggregators, we introduce a constraint that the payment each aggregator offers to each s is non-negative ex-ante.6
5Alternatively, a data source’s utility may be compared to an outside option; for simplicity, we model the outside option as having zero utility.
6Negative payments could be handled via exchangeable utilities among the data aggregators or via a trusted third–party to manage the allocations; however, in an effort to ensure clarity, we leave these scenarios aside.

We’ll introduce some notation for brevity here; we let pbs denote the expected value of the payment pbs:
pbs((cbs, abs), e) = E[pbs(y)] = cbs − abs σs2(es) + gb(x−s, δxs , σ−2 s(e−s)) (7)
where δx denotes the probability measure with mass one at x and e = (ei)i∈S . Similar to previous conventions, we deﬁne:
ps((cs, as), e) = b∈B pbs((cbs, abs), e)
Thus, the IR constraint for each data source s is formalized:

ps((cs, as), e) ≥ es

(8)

Similarly, the non-negativity constraint for each data source s and data aggregator b is given by:

pbs((cs, as), e) ≥ 0

(9)

The third constraint is incentive compatibility (IC). Intuitively, IC states that when a data source is acting rationally and choosing actions to maximize their utility, they behave as the data aggregators intended. When there is a single aggregator, IC is typically enforced by the aggregator ﬁnding the effort that minimizes their cost, e∗s, and then designing ps such that e∗s = arg maxes∈Es ps((cs, as), e) − es.7
In the competitive setting, IC for one aggregator is deﬁned holding all other aggregators payments ﬁxed. Each of the data aggregators make their choice of payment subject to the fact that data source s selects effort according to

maxes∈Es j∈B pjs((cjs, ajs), e) − es

(10)

Note that the payment each source receives depends on the efforts exerted by the other data sources. Thus, for each set of contracts offered by the aggregators, a game is induced between the data sources to determine how much effort they will exert. The aggregators compete by issuing incentives, which inﬂuences the equilibrium behavior of this game.
From the perspective of the data aggregators, the IC constraint states the desired effort level e∗s must be a dominant strategy for data source s; that is, e∗s is the utility-maximizing action for s regardless of the actions taken by other sources −s. Formally, the following must hold for all e−s ∈ E−s:

e∗s = arg max ps((cs, as), (es, e−s)) − es
es ∈Es

With these constraints, we formulate a bilevel optimization
problem for each aggregator. Consider a ﬁxed aggregator b ∈ B. Given a ﬁxed action proﬁle for all other buyers −b, i.e. given (c−b, a−b), aggregator b aims to solve:

min Lb((cb, ab), (c−b, a−b))
(cb ,ab )
s.t. e∗s = arg max ps((cs, as), (es, e−s)) − es,
es ∈Es
∀e−s ∈ E−s, ∀s ∈ S ps((cs, as), (e∗s, e∗−s)) ≥ e∗s, ∀s ∈ S pbs((cs, as), (e∗s, e∗−s)) ≥ 0, ∀s ∈ S cbs ≥ 0, abs ≥ 0, ∀s ∈ S

7For notational brevity, we will use arg max as a function rather than a setvalued function throughout this paper; this is well-deﬁned by Assumption 3.

where Lb is deﬁned in (5). Note that this problem actually has N optimization prob-
lems as constraints, making is a difﬁcult bilevel program. However, we will reformulate the aggregator’s problem to a more manageable non-linear program in the sequel. This is possible, in part, due to the nice properties of the payment contract structure introduced in Section III-D; this tractability motivates the use of payment contracts of that particular form. Next, we analyze the induced game between the data sources and simplify the aggregator’s optimization problem.
F. Induced Equilibrium Between Data Sources
To ensure a notion of incentive compatibility in equilibrium, we show there is a well-deﬁned mapping from the parameters (c, a) chosen by the aggregators to the equilibrium e∗.
Deﬁnition 2. For ﬁxed payments {pbs}s∈S,b∈B, we say e∗ = (e∗1, . . . , e∗N ) is an induced Nash equilibrium if for each data source s ∈ S:
e∗s = arg maxes∈Es E j∈B pjs(y(es, e∗−s)) − es (11)
If (11) holds for all e−s ∈ E−s rather than just at e∗−s, then we say that e∗ is an induced dominant strategy equilibrium.
Suppose now that we have a set of payments of the form discussed in Section III-D, characterized by parameters (c, a). Data source s chooses effort e∗s according to:
e∗s=argmax cbs−abs σs2(es)+gb(x−s,δxs,σ−2 s(e−s)) −es
es∈Es b∈B
(12)
for each choice of e−s ∈ E−s made by the other data sources. It is straight forward to verify that (12) is a concave maximization problem which admits a unique globally optimal solution. This follows from our assumption that σs2 is convex and decreasing, recalling that abs ≥ 0 for each b ∈ B and observing that Es is a convex set. Moreover, note that the choice of this optimal effort e∗s is not affected by the choice of e−s, since each of the gb(x−s, δxs , σ−2 s(e−s)) terms enters (12) as a constant from the perspective of s. Thus, each choice of contract parameters selected by the aggregators leads to an induced dominant strategy equilibrium for the data sources. In particular, note that the choice of

When Es = [0, ems ax] with 0 ≤ ems ax < ∞, As = [as, a¯s] where
a¯s = min {as ∈ R>0 : µs(as) = ems ax}

deﬁne (15)

On the other hand, when Es = R≥0, deﬁne As = [as, ∞).

The above deﬁnition implies as is the minimum value of as that the aggregators must offer data source s to ensure they do not have incentive to exert negative effort.8 Similarly, if the aggregators increase as past a¯s, source s cannot further increase the level of effort they exert, and the mapping µs ceases to be meaningful. Thus, when reformulating each buy-
ers optimization in the following section we will additionally constrain as ∈ As for each s ∈ S.
The following lemma provides properties on the mapping µs which are needed to prove existence of equilibria for the game between aggregators in the ﬁrst stage.

Lemma 1. Fix a data source s ∈ S. Then the mapping µs(as) is continuous and strictly increasing in as for all values of as ∈ As.

Proof. The ﬁrst-order optimality condition for the data source is given by:

2asσs(es) ddes σs(es) + 1 = 0 (16)
By assumption σs is strictly decreasing and convex so that (16) has a unique solution for all as ∈ As. By deﬁnition, this solution is µs(as). Implicit differentiation of (16) then yields:
ddaµss = 2(as)2 dµds σs(µs) 2 + σs(µs) d2dµ2 s σs(µs) −1

where we suppress the dependence of µs on as. The right-hand side of the above equation is strictly positive by Assumption 3. Continuity follows directly by Assumption 3.

G. Reformulation of Buyers Optimization Problem
Finally, using our previous analysis and assumptions, we reformulate the optimization problem faced by each aggregator. This reformulation will simplify our analysis of equilibrium behavior in the data market, and lend economic interpretability to the results presented in Section IV.
Previously, we assumed that aggregator b’s estimator is separable in Assumption 4. This allows us to write the loss function of b as:

as = j∈B ajs

(13)

fully characterizes the level of effort that data source s exerts
in equilibrium. We reiterate that the constraints on the aggre-
gator’s optimization problems will ensure the chosen contract
parameters respect the IR and non-negativity constraints. Next, we deﬁne µs : R>0 → R≥0 to be the implicitly-
deﬁned map such that µs : as → e∗s returns the solution to (12) for a given choice of as ∈ R>0. In the following section, we will use this mapping to simplify the optimization problem
facing each of the aggregators.

Lb((cb, ab), (c−b, a−b)) = i∈S hb(xi, x, Fb)σi2(µi(ai)) − j∈−b ζjb i∈S hj (xi, x, Fj )σi2(µi(ai)) + ηb i∈S cbi − abi σi2(µi(ai)) + l∈−i hb(xl, x−i, δxi )σl2(µl(al))

Recall that x = (xi)i∈S is ﬁxed and common knowledge.

Thus, we can replace each of the evaluations of the hj’s with

constants. Towards this end, for each i, l ∈ S and b ∈ B, we

deﬁne:

βib = hb(xi, x, Fb)

(17)

Deﬁnition 3. For a given data source s ∈ S, let: as = min {as ∈ R>0 : µs(as) = 0}.

(14)

8This situation could correspond to source s obfuscating their data, for example. We have restricted E to the non-negative orthant, so we will add constraints to ensure we are operating within the domain of our model.

ξib,l = h1b(xl, x−i, δxi ) ii == ll (18)

Note that each ξij,l ≥ 0, by deﬁnition of the {hb}. In addition, for each i ∈ S and b ∈ B, deﬁne:

γib = βib − j∈−b ζjbβij

(19)

Since we deﬁned ξ such that ξib,i = 1, we can write:

Lb((cb, ab), (c−b, a−b)) = i∈S γibσi2(µi(ai))

+ ηb i∈S cbi − abi l∈S ξib,lσl2(µl(al))

Similarly, the expected payment for any data source s and data aggregator b is given by:

pbs((cbs, abs), e) = cbs − abs i∈S ξsb,iσi2(ei)

Before proceeding, we provide an interpretation of the constants introduced above. The constant βsb denotes the relevance of data sampled from the point xs when constructing aggregator b’s estimate, given the distribution of all of the data sources. The parameter γsb corresponds to the level of demand that aggregator b ∈ B has for high-quality data from
source s ∈ S, factoring in the beneﬁt this data supplies to
the competitors of b. In other words, γ parameters capture
the effects of the non-rivalrous nature of data. The parameter ξsb,l denotes a measure of coupling that exists between the payment contracts pbs and pbl . In the case of a single aggregator (i.e. [17]), this coupling did not prove problematic. In contrast,
when there are multiple aggregators, each aggregator has an
incentive to try and exploit this coupling, as shall become
clear in our ensuing analysis. This coupling will play a central
role in determining the existence and efﬁciency of equilibrium
behavior in the data market.
Collecting the various expressions we have introduced,
aggregator b’s optimization problem can be re-written as:

min Lb((cb, ab), (c−b, a−b))

(20)

(cb ,ab )

s.t.

cjs − ajs

j∈B

ξsj,iσi2(µi(ai))
i∈S

≥ µs(as), ∀s ∈ S

cbs − abs

ξsb,iσi2(µi(ai)) ≥ 0, ∀s ∈ S

i∈S

as ∈ As, ∀s ∈ S abs ≥ 0, ∀s ∈ S

Without loss of generality, we let ηb = 1, by normalizing the γsb accordingly. Note that the constraint cbs ≥ 0 can be omitted, in light of the constraint cbs − abs i∈S ξsb,iσi2(e∗i ) ≥ 0, since each ξsb,i ≥ 0 and abs ≥ 0.

IV. GENERALIZED NASH EQUILIBRIA IN THE DATA MARKET
It is important to note that the constraints each aggregator faces in her optimization problem (20) depend on the actions taken by the rest of the aggregators in the data market. In particular, in order to ensure that the IR and IC constraints are maintained in equilibrium, we require an equilibrium concept which allows each aggregator’s admissible action space to

depend on the choice of contract parameters selected by the
other aggregators in the data market. Thus, we will employ the notion of a generalized Nash equilibrium [24] to study
competitive outcomes in the data market, which is a natural
extension of the typical notion of Nash equilibrium to this
setting. Let Zb ⊂ R2N be aggregator b’s actions space; that is, zb =
(cb, ab) ∈ R2N where cb = (cbs)s∈S and ab = (abs)s∈S . Each aggregator b ∈ B solves a parametric nonlinear programming
problem given by

Pb(z−b) := min {Lb(zb, z−b) : zb ∈ Mb(z−b)} (21)
zb

where Mb(z−b) = {zb : kjb(zb, z−b) ≥ 0, ∀ j ∈ J b} ⊂ Zb with J b = {1, . . . , |J b|} a ﬁnite set indexing the constraint
functions of aggregator b. Note that, unlike in the classic
deﬁnition of a Nash equilibrium, the admissible action space of aggregator b depends on z−b, the actions of −b = B \ {b}.
We say {Pb(·)}b∈B is a generalized Nash (GN) equilibrium problem. A GN equilibrium is deﬁned as follows.

Deﬁnition 4. A point z = (z1, . . . , z|B|) ∈

|B| b=1

Zb

is

said

to be a GN equilibrium for {Pb(·)}b∈B if for all b ∈ B, zb

solves Pb(z−b).

We now analyze the game between the aggregators utilizing the notion of a GN problem and GN equilibrium. We will characterize the existence and uniqueness of GN equilibria in two scenarios. In Section IV-A, we will consider the case where the effort spaces of data sources are unbounded, i.e. Es = R≥0. In Section IV-B, we will characterize the case where each data source has an upper bound on the level of effort they can exert, i.e. Es = [0, em s ax). In Section IV-C, we will then address the social efﬁciency of the equilibria identiﬁed in Section IV-A. A similar analysis of the equilibria identiﬁed in Section IV-B can be found in Appendix B.
Before preceding to out main results, we provide a technical lemma that will have a central role in our ensuing analysis and introduce some notation which will simplify the statement of our results. For compactness, for a given set of a parameters we deﬁne µ(a) = (µs(a))s∈S . (Recall that a is the sum of a parameters, as deﬁned in Equation (13).)

Lemma 2. Suppose z = (zb)b∈B, where zb = (cb, ab), is a GN equilibrium for the game {Pb(·)}b∈B deﬁned by (20). Then for each s ∈ S:

j∈B cjs − j∈B ajs

i∈S ξsj,iσi2(µi(ai)) − µs(as) = 0 (22)

In other words, the IR constraint is always binding in equilib-

rium, and the expected payment to data source s is equal to

the effort exerted in equilibrium: ps((cs, as), µ(a)) = µs(as)

Proof. Suppose that there is an equilibrium in which the IR constraint is not binding for some data source s. Then, there must a exists an aggregator b whose non-negativity constriant corresponding to source s is also not binding. Thus, this cannot be an equilibrium as aggregator b can unilaterally improve their payoff by decreasing cbs without causing any of the constraints to be violated, contradicting the assertion that the
given selection of parameters is an equilibrium.

Notation
s
S
b
B pbs abs as cbs cs as as as
As
µs ζjb βsb γsb γs ξsb,l

Meaning
index of data source index set of data sources index of aggregator index set of aggregators
expected payment from aggregator b to source s linear term in pbs; used to adjust level of effort es in equilibrium vector containing the a parameters offered to source s by the members of B constant term in pbs; used to ensure incentive compatibility in equilibrium vector containing the c parameters offered to sources s by the members of B sum of a parameters offered to source s across all members of B mimimum value of as required to ensure source s does not exert negative effort minimum value of as at which data source s exerts her maximum effort [as, as], the allowable range of as implicit map which returns the equilibrium value of es as a function of as level of competition between j, b ∈ B
relevance of data from xs in constructing aggregator b’s estimator aggregate demand for es from b sum of demand for data source s across all members of B coupling between pbs and pbl
TABLE I: Notation Reference Chart

Deﬁned or First Used in Equation – – – – (7) (6) – (6) –
(13) (15) (14)
– – (5)
(17) (19) (23) (36)

The result of Lemma 2 is a well-known result in contract design—that is, the individual rationality constraint always binds for the optimal contract [23]. As shall become clear in our analysis in the following sections, the equality (22) forms an implicit constraint that appears in each of the aggregators’ optimizations, which will be directly responsible for the degeneracy observed in the data market. Roughly speaking, while the a parameters selected by the aggregators determine the level of effort that the data sources will exert, the c parameters determine what portion of this effort each aggregator is expected to compensate.
For each s ∈ S, deﬁne:

γs = j∈B γsj

(23)

which can be interpreted to be the total demand for high quality data from data source s. Next, we deﬁne:

cs = cjs
j∈B

qsb(a) = abs

ξsj,iσi2(µi(ai))
i∈S

qs(a) = qsj(a) + µs(as)
j∈B

Note that Lemma 2 implies that if (c, a) is an GN equilibrium
in the game between the aggregators then cs = qs(a) will hold for each s ∈ S. Moreover, the non-negativity constraints in the game between the buyers will hold only if cbs ≥ qsb(a) for each s ∈ S and b ∈ B.

A. Unbounded Effort Spaces
Let us ﬁrst consider the case where there is no upper bound on the effort the data sources may exert, i.e. Es = R≥0.
Theorem 1. Consider the game {Pb(·)}b∈B, where each aggregator’s objective is to solve the optimization in (20). Suppose that for each s ∈ S, Es = R≥0 and γs ≥ as. Further, suppose that γij > 0, ∀ i ∈ S, j ∈ B. Then, there is either no GN equilibrium or an inﬁnite number of GN equilibria. Moreover, if (c¯, a¯) is a GN equilibrium, then the following conditions hold:

1) The set of inﬁnite GN equilibria is given by:
(c, a) : a = a¯, cs = qs(a¯), cbs ≥ qsb(a¯), ∀s, ∀b}
That is, the a parameters selected by the aggregators are the same across each GN equilibrium, and all degeneracy lies in the equilibrium c parameters which lie in the |B|dimensional convex polytope deﬁned above. 2) The effort exerted by each data source is the same in each GN equilibrium and the efforts constitute a unique induced dominated strategy equilibrium between the data sources. More precisely, each data source exerts effort µs(a¯s) in all GN equilibria.
Before going ahead with the proof of the theorem, we discuss its hypotheses and implications. The hypothesis that γs ≥ as implies that there is enough demand for the data from source s such that she does not have incentive to exert negative effort in equilibrium. Together, the aggregators will provide sufﬁcient incentive to s so that s accepts each of the contracts offered to her, and truthfully report her query-response. When we investigate the case where s only provides readings to a subset of the aggregators in Section V, only the relevant subset of aggregators must maintain this constraint. This condition places a restriction on what subsets of incentives from the aggregators each data source is willing to accept.
As we discovered in Section III-F, the a = (ab)b∈B parameters selected by the aggregators uniquely determine how much effort the data sources exert in equilibrium. Intuitively, the fact that the a parameters are constant across all GN equilibria means that, when GN equilibria do exist in the game between the aggregators, the aggregators have agreed to incentivize the data sources to each exert a particular level of effort. The proof of the theorem will shed some light on how this unique choice of a parameters is selected when GN equilibria exist, and also demonstrate what ‘goes wrong’ in cases where the aggregators cannot agree on how much effort to incentivize the sources to exert. In the latter case, no GN equilibrium solution exists in the game between the aggregators. Further commentary on this point is provided after the proof of Theorem 2.

Meanwhile, for a ﬁxed proﬁle of a parameters, the c = (cb)b∈B parameters determine how much of this effort each aggregator is responsible for compensating in expectation. Even when aggregators are able to agree on how much effort to incentivize from the data sources and select the unique GN equilibria choice for a, there is a non-uniqueness in the c parameters in equilibrium. This implies that there is a fundamental ambiguity in who will fund the exertion of the data sources. In the extreme case, it is possible for one aggregator to pay for the entirety of the expected compensation offered to the data sources, while the other aggregators pay nothing in expectation.

Proof of Theorem 1. By Lemma 2, we have that:

cbs = j∈B ajs i∈S ξsj,iσi2(µi(ai)) + µs(as) − j∈−b cjs (24)
Plugging in this constraint, the cost function for aggregator b can be expressed as:

L˜b(ab, (c−b, a−b)) = i∈S γibσi2(µi(ai)) + j∈−b aji l∈S ξij,lσl2(µl(al)) − cji

+ µi(ai)

By swapping the roles of i and l in the middle term above, aggregator b’s cost can be decomposed into the sum of costs for each data sources. We deﬁne:
L˜bs(abs, (c−b, a−b)) = γsb + j∈−b l∈S ajl ξlj,s σs2(µs(as)) − j∈−b cjs + µs(as)

Then aggregator b’s optimization problem reduces to:
min s∈S L˜bs(abs, (c−b, a−b))
ab
s.t. j∈−b ajs i∈S ξsj,iσi2(µi(ai)) − cjs + µs(as) ≥ 0 as ∈ As, abs ≥ 0
Note that the cost does not depend on cbs, for any s. We complete the argument by ignoring the constraints and showing that the constraints are satisﬁed for the set of equilibria we characterize.
Differentiating the cost with respect to abs and applying (16) and ξsj,s = 1 for all j, we have that:

Dab L˜bs

=

1 a

abs − γsb −

s

s

j∈−b

l∈−s ajl ξlj,s Das µs

where Dx ≡ ∂∂x . Applying Lemma 1, which states Das µs > 0, we get the following conditions:

Let a denote a column vector with entries aji and let γ
denote a column vector containing all the terms of the form γij for each i ∈ S and j ∈ B. Then, (25) can be written as the
system of equations given by:

a = Ξa + γ

(26)

Here, Ξ is a non-negative matrix whose entries are composed of the ξij,l values such that (26) expresses the set of equality constraints deﬁned by (25) for all s ∈ S and b ∈ B. To solve
this reduced game, it sufﬁces to ﬁnd a solution to (26) such that ai ∈ Ai and aji ≥ 0 for all i ∈ S and j ∈ B.
Let us consider ﬁrst solutions to the system of equations
(26). Systems of equations of this form are well studied in
the economics literature, as they are of the form speciﬁed by
the celebrated Leontief input-output model. It has been shown
that such systems of equations have a non-negative solution if and only if ρ(Ξ) < 1, where ρ(Ξ) is the spectral radius of Ξ [25]. Moreover, if such a solution exists, it must be unique.
Thus, if ρ(Ξ) < 1, inversion of the (I − Ξ) matrix yields the equilibrium a, and, by Lemma 2, we can pick any c such that for each s ∈ S, b ∈ B,

cbs ≥ abs l∈S ξsb,lσl2(µl(al))

(27)

and (24) hold. If ρ(Ξ) ≥ 1, there will not exist a non-negative solution and
there is no point (c, a) that simultaneously optimizes (20) for all b ∈ B. Finally, we demonstrate that none of the solutions to (26) and corresponding c values deﬁned above violate the constraint as ∈ As = [as, ∞). By inspecting equations of the form (25), we see that as ≥ γs ≥ as, and thus the constraints remain satisﬁed. It follows that there is either a unique set of a parameters deﬁning a GN equilibria for the reduced game between the aggregators, otherwise there is no GN equilibrium. Moreover, in the case that an equilibrium choice of a does exist, by inspection we see that the polytope of c parameters deﬁned in the statement of the theorem constitute GN equilibria for the full game.

It is interesting to note that the existence of GN equilibria depends solely on the value of the ξsb,l parameters; it does not depend on the magnitude of the γsb parameters (given that they are large enough to ensure participation of all parties).
This implies that the existence of GN equilibria follows from
the form of the contract mechanisms, and does not depend
on whether or not there are solutions that are beneﬁcial to all
parties involved.

 

Dab

L˜ bs

<

0,

s

Dab L˜bs = 0,

s

 

Da

b

L˜ bs

>

0,

s

if 0 ≤ abs < γsb + j∈−b l∈−s ajl ξlj,s if abs = γsb + j∈−b l∈−s ajl ξlj,s if abs > γsb + j∈−b l∈−s ajl ξlj,s

Hence, the abs that minimizes aggregator b’s cost satisﬁes:

abs = γsb + j∈−b l∈−s ajl ξlj,s

(25)

Performing this analysis for all combinations of s ∈ S and b ∈ B yields a system of M × N equations with M × N unknowns, of the form (25).

B. Bounded Effort Spaces
Let us now consider the case where the data sources’ effort space is upper-bounded, i.e. Es = [0, ems ax], 0 ≤ ems ax < ∞.
Theorem 2. Consider the game {Pb(·)}b∈B where each aggregator’s objective is to solve the optimization in (20). Suppose that for each s ∈ S, Es = [0, ems ax] with 0 ≤ ems ax < ∞ and that γij > 0 for all i ∈ S, j ∈ B. There is an inﬁnite number of GN equilibria z = (zb)b∈B. Moreover, the following statements hold:

1) There may exist two GN equilibria (c1, a1) and (c2, a2) such that a1 = a2;
2) If (c¯, a¯) constitutes a GN equilibrium then the following
set of parameters also constitute GN equilibria:

(c, a) : a = a¯, ∀s ∈ S, b ∈ B, cs = qs(a¯), cbs ≥ qsb(a¯)

3) While the data sources may exert different levels of effort across different equilibria, each collection of a parameters chosen by the aggregators still induce a dominanted strategy equilibrium between the data sources.

Proof. Following the proof of Theorem 1, the problems Pb(·) can be reduced to the optimization problem
P˜b(z−b) := minab L˜b(ab, z−b) : ∀s ∈ S, as ∈ As, ab ≥ 0

To show existence, we show that the game deﬁned by {P˜b(·)}b∈B satisﬁes the assumptions of Theorem 5, which is
originally from [26] and can be found in the Appendix.

First, we note that the objective function of each buyer

is continuous in each of its arguments. Indeed, Assumption 3 ensures that σs2 is continuous and Lemma 1 ensures the map µs is continuous for each s ∈ S. Continuity of the
objective function follows by recalling that the composition

of continuous maps yields a continuos map. Next, for each j ∈ B, the constraints deﬁning M−j(z−j) are continuous, and thus the correspondence z−j → M−j(z−j) is upper
semi-continuous (indeed, even continuous). Continuing with

the analysis from Theorem 1, it is easy to see that in the

case where we constrain ai ∈ Ai, the best response set for aggregator b is deﬁned by the following conditional statements

for each s ∈ S:

abs = as − 
abs = γsb +
abs = as −

j∈−b abs j∈−b l∈−s ajl ξlj,s
j∈−b ajs

if Tsb(a−b) < as if Tsb(a−b) ∈ As (28) if Tsb(a−b) > as

where Tsb(a−b) = γsb + j∈−b l∈−s ajl ξlj,s + j∈−b ajs. Thus, the best response set for aggregator b is always a
singleton which in turn implies it is always contractable. Further, each best response mapping BRb : a−b → ab is continuous in a−b. Hence,

min Lb(ab, a−b) = Lb(BRb(a−b), a−b)

(29)

ab

and thus the mapping a−b → minab Lb(ab, a−b) is continuous since Lb and BRb are continuous and the composition of continuous maps is continuous. Thus, by Theorem 5 there exists a GN equilibrium for the reduced game between the aggregators. As in the proof of Theorem 1, we see that for any collection of a parameters that constitute a GN equilibrium for this simpliﬁed game, any collection of c parameters that lie in the convex polytope deﬁned in the statement of the theorem constitute a GN equilibrium for the full game.

We now remark on why there are always GN equilibria to the game between the aggregators when each source can exert a ﬁnite amount of effort (i.e. Theorem 2), but there may not be a GN equilibrium when the sources are allowed to exert inﬁnite effort (i.e. Theorem 1). Referring to (26), consider the case where ρ(Ξ) = k < 1 and GN equilibria

exist. Suppose we replace Ξ in (26) with αΞ, where α > 1, and note that ρ(αΞ) = αρ(Ξ). As α is increased towards k1 , the matrix (I − αΞ) gets closer to becoming singular, and the corresponding solution to the system of equations, a, approaches inﬁnity. This implies the data sources exert an inﬁnite amount of effort in equilibrium.
Intuitively, this corresponds to the coupling between the payment contracts approaching some critical limit, past which point no GN equilibria exist. However, in the case where the data sources are constrained to exert a ﬁnite amount of effort, this run-away behavior is not possible, and GN equilibria always exist. While the constraints bounding the effort the data sources may exert ensure the existence of GN equilibria, their activation and inactivation may lead to a degeneracy in how much effort each data source exerts in equilibrium.
Note that, in Theorem 1 and Theorem 2, we assume that either all of the data sources are constrained in their effort, or all unconstrained in their effort. In the case where some data sources are constrained and others unconstrained, the task of determining existence of equilibria to the game becomes a combinatorial endeavor. We exclude the analysis of this case, as it is largely an algebraic exercise and lends little insight to the broader problem.

C. Conditions for Social Inefﬁciency

The question of equilibrium efﬁciency or quality arises naturally in game theoretic settings. In this section, we identify necessary and sufﬁcient conditions under which the equilibria are socially inefﬁcient; as we will see in Theorem 3, as soon as any non-diagonal ξ parameter is non-zero, there will be social inefﬁciency.
Due to the wide variety of estimators data aggregators can use, as well as effort-to-variance functions that characterize data sources, it is difﬁcult to provide interesting general bounds on the price of anarchy, a widely used metric for the inefﬁciency of equilibria [27]. However, when both are speciﬁed, the price of anarchy can be explicitly calculated [22].
In this section, we will focus our attention on the case where the data sources are unconstrained in the effort they exert, i.e. when Es is unbounded, as the results in this case provide a clearer intuition for how our chosen class of mechanisms give rise to inefﬁciencies. However, in the interest of completeness, in Appendix B the result is extended to the case where data sources are effort-constrained.
Let us denote by e the vector denoting the level of effort the data sources exert. The social cost is deﬁned as the sum of the cost experienced by all parties.

Deﬁnition 5 (Ex-ante Social Cost). Suppose that ηj = 1 for

each aggregator j ∈ B. We deﬁne the ex-ante social cost to

be the sum of the utility functions of all the data aggregators

and data sources—that is:

L(e) =

E fˆj (x∗) − f (x∗) 2−

j∈B

Xj

ζj fˆk (x∗) − f (x∗) 2 +
k∈−j k Xk

s∈S es (30)

Note that this sum does not include any of the payments
made in the marketplace, as they are simply lossless transfers of wealth. The fact that ηj = 1 for each j ∈ B

ensures that these transfers of wealth are lossless from a utility perspective—i.e. the aggregators and sources value the payment equally. However, this is simply a rescaling and, more importantly, it allows us to isolate the social loss due to the mechanism, and ignore any losses due to differential preferences in payment currency. Indeed, note that the social cost only depends on the effort exerted by the sources.
The following result states that there is always a unique level of effort that minimizes the social cost.
Lemma 3. Suppose that γij > 0, ∀j ∈ B and ∀i ∈ S. There is a unique minimizer of L(e).
Proof. The ex-ante social cost can be re-written as L (e) = i∈S j∈B γij σi2(ei) + i∈S ei. By Assumption 3 and the
assumption that γsj > 0 for some j ∈ B, De2s L(e) is strictly positive. In addition, Des L(e) does not depend on ei for i ∈ S \ {s}.
Hence, De2L has positive entries on the diagonal and entries of zero everywhere else so that it is positive deﬁnite which, in turn, implies L is strictly convex. Thus, since E is a convex set, L has a unique minimizer on E.

The price of anarchy is deﬁned for each Nash equilibrium as the ratio of the social cost under the Nash equilibrium to the socially optimal cost.

Deﬁnition 6 (Ex-ante Price of Anarchy). The ex-ante price of anarchy is given by PoA(e) = LL((eeˆ)) , where eˆ ∈ E is the minimizer of L.

Since eˆ is unique minimizer of L, for all e = eˆ we must have that PoA(e) > 1. Intuitively, the larger PoA(e), the more socially inefﬁcient the solution is. With this metric in mind, we provide necessary and sufﬁcient conditions for the game between the aggregators to yield a socially efﬁcient outcome, in the case that the effort space for each data source is unbounded.
Theorem 3. Suppose γij > 0, ∀i ∈ S, ∀j ∈ B. Further suppose that Es = [0, ∞) for each s ∈ S. Then, there exists a GN equilibrium to the game {P b(·)}b∈B between the aggregators for which the price of anarchy is equal to one if and only if for each j ∈ B and each i, l ∈ S such that i = l we have that ξij,l = 0.
Proof. When there is no GN equilibria of the aggregators’ game, the proof is trivial. On the other hand, when there is GN equilibria we have that

Des L(e) = 2γsσs(eˆs) ddes σs(eˆs) + 1 = 0. (31)

Since L is strictly convex, solving the ﬁrst order conditions in
(31) yields the global minimizer. Just as with (16), the solution
to (31), eˆs ∈ R+, is implicitly deﬁned by µˆs : γs → eˆs. Moreover, at a GN equilibrium, we have
2asσs(es) ddes σs(es) + 1 = 0. Thus, as a consequence of Lemma 1, the data sources exert eˆs ∈ R+ if and only if ai = γi for all i ∈ S. By the proof of Theorem 1 an equilibrium choice of the parameters (c, a) must satisfy:

ai = γi + j∈B k∈−j l∈−i akl ξlk,i

(32)

Thus, we will have ai = γi if and only if:

0 = j∈B k∈−j l∈−i akl ξlk,i

(33)

However, abs > γsb > 0 for some s ∈ S and b ∈ B since in equilibrium we have asb = γsb + j∈−b l∈−s ajl ξlj,s (see (28)), and by assumption ξlj,i > 0 for some j ∈ B and some i, l ∈ S with i = l. Thus, (33) cannot hold.

Theorem 3 conﬁrms the typical result that Nash equilibria are generally (ex-ante) inefﬁcient. However, it further shows that, in the particular case of this framework, GN equilibria are efﬁcient only when there is no coupling between the payments the aggregators make to data sources. In this light, we ﬁnd it appealing to regard the data sources as public good which the aggregators have incentive to exploit. As the following result demonstrates, this problematic coupling will always arise when the aggregators utilize linear regression.

Corollary 1. Suppose that each aggregator b ∈ B has estimator fˆb which is linear regression. Further suppose that
the conditions of Theorem 3 hold. Then there does not exist a GNE solution to {P b(·)}b∈B wherein the price of anarchy is equal to 1.

Proof. It can be shown (see [17, Footnote 6]) that

gb(x−s, δxs ,σ−2 s(e−s)) = Ex˜∼δxs [x˜T , 1] · (XT X)−1XT · diag(σ−2 s(e−s)) · X(XT X)−1 · [x˜T , 1]T

where

X

is

the

matrix

whose

rows

are

[x

T i

,

1]

for

i

∈

−s

and diag(σ−2 s(e−s)) is the diagonal matrix whose (i, i)–th

entry is σi2(ei). By inspection, gb(x−s, δxs , σ−2 s(e−s)) is ill-

deﬁned

if

[

x

T s

,

1]

is

orthogonal

to

span{

([x

T i

,

1])i

∈−s

}.

This,

in turn, implies the payment contract pbs is ill-deﬁned. Since

all

the

payments

are

assumed

well-deﬁned,

[x

T s

,

1]

cannot

be

orthogonal

to

span

{([x

T i

,

1])i

∈−s

}.

Thus

by

inspection

there

exists i, l ∈ S such that i = l and ξib,l > 0. Thus, by

Theorem 3, there is no efﬁcient equilibrium.

V. PARTIAL DATA SHARING
Thus far we have made the restrictive assumption that each of the data sources accepts payment from and provides query responses to each of the aggregators in the data market. We have done this primarily to ease the introduction of the notation needed to state and prove our main results. In this section, we remove this assumption and analyze the case where each of the data sources only accepts payment contracts from and provides query responses to a subset of the data aggregators. That is, we now assume that prior to the ﬁrst stage outlined at the beginning of Section III each data source s ∈ S has agreed to accept the incentives issued by some subset of the buyers Bs ⊂ B. As we shall see, these changes do not alter our previous analysis signiﬁcantly. When aggregator b ∈ B only purchases data from a subset of the data sources, the primary difference is that b now has fewer contract parameters (cb, ab) and fewer IR and non-negativity constraints in his optimization. The removal of these terms and constraints reduces the dimensionality of the degeneracy observed in the equilibria of the datamarket, but the overall structure of our

analysis changes little. In order to demonstrate this point, in this section we will focus on demonstrating in some detail how a result analogous to Theorem 1 can be obtained in this setting.
In practice, the mechanism by which data sources choose which incentives to accept and which aggregators to work with could be quite complicated. Although this is an important and interesting point for future research, in this paper we will assume that the sets Bs are exogenously given for all s. Our purpose here is to show that for any exogenously ﬁxed assignments of data sources to data aggregators, the degeneracies we highlighted earlier remain whenever at least one data source receives payment from and provides data to multiple aggregators, i.e. whenever the non-rivalrous nature of data has an effect on the data market.9 Throughout the section we will outline how the formulation we have considered must be modiﬁed to ﬁt this more general setting, and discuss how the results we have presented thus-far carry through. As we shall see, the generalization is rather straightforward, and thus some details are omitted in the interest of brevity.
Once it has been decided which data sources will provide data to which aggregators, the interactions of the data market proceed as before. Each aggregator b ∈ B issues incentives pb = (pbs)s∈Sb of the form (6) to the members of Sb, then each data source s ∈ S evaluates the payments ps = (pjs)j∈Bs , decides what level of effort to exert when producing ys and then shares this reading with the members of Bs. Each aggregator then processes the data she has received to construct her estimate for fb, issues payments pb, and incurs loss Lb.
Note that we have abused notation in redeﬁning ps and pb above to only reﬂect the subset of payments that are issued in this section. Similar abuses will follow as we redeﬁne a number of objects from earlier in the document to be appropriate for this new setting. Roughly speaking, each of these items will be redeﬁned by replacing B with Bs and S with Sb where appropriate. For example, the buyers now need only to select the parameters cb = (cbs)s∈Sb and ab = (abs)s∈Sb when issuing incentives. We will omit the details of some of these changes when context makes our meaning clear.
We may now model the utility for each data source s by:

us(es, ps) = E

pjs(yj(e)) − es

(34)

j∈Bs

and the loss for each aggregator b by:

Lb(pb, e) = E

fˆb (x∗) − f (x∗) 2
X

b

−

ζb fˆj (x∗) − f (x∗) 2

j∈−b j Xj

+ ηb s∈Sb pbs(yb(e))

where we now adopt the convention that X b = (xs, ys)s∈Sb and yb(e) = (ys(es))s∈Sb .

9An interesting question for future work is the study of how these assignments Bs would come to be in real-world settings, as well as the identiﬁcation of socially desirable assignments. Our results here provide evidence that it will likely be difﬁcult to ﬁnd these desirable assignments.

Letting xb = (xi)i∈Sb , the expected value of the payment pbs can now be calculated as
pbs((cbs, abs), e) = E[pbs(yb(e))] = cbs − abs σs2(es) + gb(xbSb\{s}, δxs , (σi2(ei))i∈Sb\{s}
and the expected total payment s receives will be ps((cs, as), e) = b∈Bs pbs((cbs, abs), e). With these refactored deﬁnitions, the individual rationality, non-negativity and in-
centive compatibility constraints on the buyers’ optimization
problems are still given by equations (8), (9) and (10), respec-
tively. Now letting as = j∈Bs ajs, it is straightforward to show
that the ﬁrst-order optimality condition in (16) holds, and the
ensuing analysis in Section III-F pulls through. That is, one can show that each selection of parameters a = (ab)b∈B still induces a game between the data sources for which there is
a dominant strategy equilibrium. Moreover, for each s ∈ S,
there exists an implicitly deﬁned map µs : R≥0 → R≥0 which returns the equilibrium level of effort e∗s for each choice of as. The constants as, as and the set As can also be redeﬁned for this setting in a natural way.
Following steps similar to those in Section III-G, the loss
for aggregator b can now be written as:

Lb((cb, ab), (c−b, a−b)) =

+

γibσi2(µi(ai))

i∈S \Sb

i∈Sb γibσi2(µi(ai))

+ ηb i∈Sb cbi − abi l∈Sb ξib,lσl2(µl(al))

(35)

where we deﬁne βsb = hb(xs, xb, Fb) and then deﬁne γsb = βsb − j∈Bs\{b} ζjbβsj for each b ∈ B and s ∈ Sb. Note that if s ∈ Sb, then we do not need to deﬁne the constant βsb, since the query response that s produces does not factor into
the estimator that aggregator b constructs for f . On the other hand, we do need to deﬁne γsb for each s ∈ S and b ∈ B, since we have assumed that s has agreed to provide at least
one aggregator with the reading ys. However, we note that the second term on the right hand side of (35) does not depend
on any of aggregator b’s decision variables. Similarly, we only need to deﬁne the parameter ξib,l if both
i, l ∈ Sb. In the case that data sources i and l both accept payment from aggregator b we then deﬁne:
ξib,l = h1b(xl, xb−i, δxi ) ii == ll (36)

Applying the preceding analysis, aggregator b’s optimization problem can now be re-written as:

min Lb((cb, ab), (c−b, a−b))
(cb ,ab )







s.t. cjs − ajs  ξsj,iσi2(µi(ai)) ≥ µs(as),

j∈Bs

i∈Sj

∀s ∈ Sb

cbs − abs

ξsb,iσi2(µi(ai)) ≥ 0, ∀s ∈ Sb (37)

i∈Sb

as ∈ As, ∀s ∈ Sb

abs ≥ 0, ∀s ∈ Sb

where Lb is now deﬁned by (35). Note that the optimization facing aggregator b in (37) is quite similar to the optimization in (20), save the modiﬁcations to some IR and non-negativity constraints. As we shall see in the statement of Theorem 4 and Corollary 2 below, when there are GN equilibria in the game between the buyers, the removal of some of these constraints will affect the degeneracy previously seen in the c parameters.
Before stating our generalization to Theorem 1 we redeﬁne some ﬁnal notation. First, we deﬁne: γs = j∈Bs γsj, where we emphasize that γs does not depend on γsb if b ∈/ Bs, since this term will fall out when characterizing the optimality condition for aggregator b, and not affect the existence of GN equilibria. We then deﬁne for each s ∈ S and b ∈ B: qsb(a) = abs i∈Sb ξsj,iσi2(µi(ai)) and qs(a) = j∈Bs qsj (a) + µs(as).
Theorem 4. Consider the game {Pb(·)}b∈B where each aggregator’s objective is to solve the optimization in (37). Suppose that for each s ∈ S, Es = R≥0, γs ≥ as. Further, suppose that γsb > 0, for each s and b such that s ∈ Sb. If there exists a GN equilibrium (c¯, a¯) then the following conditions hold:
1) The set of GN equilibria in the game is given by
(c, a) : a = a¯, cs = qs(a¯), cbs ≥ qsb(a¯), ∀s, ∀b ∈ Bs}
That is, the a parameters selected by the aggregators are the same across each GN equilibrium, and for each s ∈ S the equilibrium cs = (cbs)b∈Bs parameters lie in the |Bs|dimensional polytope deﬁned above. 2) The effort exerted by each data source is the same in each GN equilibrium and the efforts constitute a unique induced dominated strategy equilibrium between the data sources. More precisely, each data source exerts effort µs(a¯s) in each GN equilibrium.
The proof is almost exactly the same as the proof of Theorem 1 and is omitted here. In particular, note that the only difference we need to consider is that the aggregators now have fewer decision variables and fewer constraints on these decision parameters. The removal of these components manifests itself in the dimensionality of the polytope of equilibrium parameters.
Corollary 2. Consider the game {Pb(·)}b∈B where each aggregator’s objective is to solve the optimization in (37), and suppose the assumptions of Theorem 4 hold. If there exists a GN equilibrium solution (c¯, a¯) then the following two statements are true:
1) If |Bs| = 1 for all s ∈ S then (c¯, a¯) is the only GN equilibrium.
2) If there exists s ∈ S such that |Bs| ≥ 2 then there are an inﬁnite number of GN equilibria.
We state the previous result to emphasize that when even a single data source accepts incentives from more than a single aggregator an inﬁnity of GN equilibria arise in the data market (given that any GN equilibria exist). Returning to Theorem 4, we see complete degeneracy in the equilibrium c parameters offered to any data source who sells data to multiple buyers.

An analogous generalization to Theorem 2 is also straightforward to obtain for the more general case we consider in this setting, though we omit it in the interest of brevity. The analysis conducted in the proof of Theorem 3 also follows through in a natural way. In particular, we still observe that the ﬁrst order optimality conditions for the aggregators will coincide with the socially efﬁcient choice of pricing parameters if and only if each of the non-diagonal ξ parameters is zero. In particular, this means that if |Bs| = 1 for each s ∈ S the data market will achieve a socially efﬁcient outcome, with regards to the exogenous assignment of data sources we have assumed has already occurred.
VI. CLOSING REMARKS
We analyzed the strategic interactions between multiple data aggregators who share a pool of data sources. Previous work showed that a single data aggregator can ﬁnd unique solutions that achieve socially efﬁcient outcomes, but we demonstrate that the same mechanisms will break down as soon as a second data aggregator enters the market. In particular, we show that there are either no GN equilibria or inﬁnitely many, and these solutions are frequently socially inefﬁcient. This highlights the need for further research into mechanisms for data markets when there are multiple purchasers. In particular, there is a need for mechanisms that can simultaneously handle moral hazard and the non-rivalrous nature of data.
APPENDIX
A. GNE Existence Result
Theorem 5 (Existence of GN equilibria [26]). Consider a GN equilibrium problem {P b(·)}b∈B. Suppose that for each b ∈ B, the following hold: i) the correspondence Mb : i∈−b Zi → Zb is upper semi-continuous. ii) the map Lb is continuous on the graph of Mb. iii) the map z−b → minzb∈Mb(z−b) Lb(zb, z−b) is continuous. iv) for all z−b, the best response set, BRb(z−b) = arg min{Lb(zb, z−b) : zb ∈ Mb(z−b)} is contractable.
Then, there exists a GN equilibrium.

B. Price of Anarchy with Bounded Effort Spaces
Theorem 6. Suppose γij > 0, ∀i ∈ S, ∀j ∈ B. Further suppose that Es = [0, em s ax] and that γs ∈ [as, as) for each s ∈ S. Then, there exists a GN equilibrium to the game {P b(·)}b∈B between the aggregators for which the price of anarchy is equal to one if and only if for each j ∈ B and each i, l ∈ S such that i = l we have that ξij,l = 0.

Proof. In the case where As is bounded ∀s ∈ S, we make

an analogous argument as was made in Theorem 3. Suppose

that as = γs, ∀s ∈ S as is needed for the socially optimal

solution. Then, by assumption, for each s ∈ S, we have as <

as < as, and thus, it must be true that in equilibrium the a–

parameters are given by an equation of the form a = Ξa + γ,

since the best response for each aggregator is given by abs =

γ

b s

+

j∈−b

l∈−s ajl ξlj,s, which is the second option in (28).

However, again it cannot be the case that γs = as for each s ∈ S if ξij,l = for some j ∈ B and i, l ∈ S such that i = l.

REFERENCES
[1] M. Babaioff, R. Kleinberg, and R. Paes Leme, “Optimal mechanisms for selling information,” in Proceedings of the 13th ACM Conference on Electronic Commerce. ACM, 2012, pp. 92–109.
[2] D. Bergemann, A. Bonatti, and A. Smolin, “The design and price of information,” American Economic Review, vol. 108, no. 1, pp. 1–48, 2018.
[3] D. G. Dobakhshari, P. Naghizadeh, M. Liu, and V. Gupta, “A reputationbased contract for repeated crowdsensing with costly veriﬁcation,” in American Control Conference (ACC), 2017. IEEE, 2017, pp. 5243– 5248.
[4] D. Bergemann and A. Bonatti, “Selling cookies,” American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 259–94, 2015.
[5] I. Caragiannis, A. Procaccia, and N. Shah, “Truthful univariate estimators,” in International Conference on Machine Learning, 2016, pp. 127–135.
[6] Y. Chen, N. Immorlica, B. Lucier, V. Syrgkanis, and J. Ziani, “Optimal data acquisition for statistical estimation,” in Proceedings of the 2018 ACM Conference on Economics and Computation. ACM, 2018, pp. 27–44.
[7] N. Miller, P. Resnick, and R. Zeckhauser, “Eliciting informative feedback: The peer-prediction method,” Management Science, vol. 51, no. 9, pp. 1359–1373, 2005.
[8] D. Prelec, “A bayesian truth serum for subjective data,” science, vol. 306, no. 5695, pp. 462–466, 2004.
[9] B. Faltings, J. J. Li, and R. Jurca, “Incentive mechanisms for community sensing,” IEEE Transactions on Computers, vol. 63, no. 1, pp. 115–128, 2014.
[10] A. Dasgupta and A. Ghosh, “Crowdsourced judgement elicitation with endogenous proﬁciency,” in Proceedings of the 22nd international conference on World Wide Web. ACM, 2013, pp. 319–330.
[11] G. Radanovic and B. Faltings, “Incentive schemes for participatory sensing,” in Proceedings of the 2015 International Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems. International Foundation for Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems, 2015, pp. 1081–1089.
[12] V. Shnayder, A. Agarwal, R. Frongillo, and D. C. Parkes, “Informed truthfulness in multi-task peer prediction,” in Proceedings of the 2016 ACM Conference on Economics and Computation. ACM, 2016, pp. 179–196.
[13] Y. Liu and Y. Chen, “Machine-learning aided peer prediction,” in Proceedings of the 2017 ACM Conference on Economics and Computation. ACM, 2017, pp. 63–80.
[14] W. Vickrey, “Counterspeculation, auctions, competitive sealed tenders,” J. Finance, vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 8–37, 1961.
[15] N. Nisan, T. Roughgarden, E. Tardos, and V. V. Vazirani, Algorithmic Game Theory. Cambridge University Press, 2007.
[16] S. Chawla, J. D. Hartline, and B. Sivan, “Optimal crowdsourcing contests,” Games and Economic Behavior, 2015.
[17] Y. Cai, C. Daskalakis, and C. Papdimitriou, “Optimum statistical estimation with strategic data sources,” in JMLR: Workship and Conf. Proc., vol. 40, 2015, pp. 1–17.
[18] F. Farokhi, I. Shames, and M. Cantoni, “Budget-constrained contract design for effort-averse sensors in averaging based estimation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1509.08193, 2015.
[19] ——, “Promoting truthful behavior in participatory-sensing mechanisms,” IEEE Signal Process. Lett., vol. 22, no. 10, pp. 1538–1542, Oct 2015.
[20] D. G. Dobakhshari, N. Li, and V. Gupta, “An incentive-based approach to distributed estimation with strategic sensors,” in Proc. 55th Conf. Decision Control. IEEE, 2016, pp. 6141–6146.
[21] F. Farokhi, A. M. H. Teixeira, and C. Langbort, “Estimation with strategic sensors,” IEEE Trans. Autom. Control, vol. 62, no. 2, pp. 724– 739, Feb 2017.
[22] T. Westenbroek, R. Dong, L. J. Ratliff, and S. S. Sastry, “Statistical estimation with strategic data sources in competitive settings,” in Proc. 56th IEEE Conf. Decision and Control, 2017.
[23] P. Bolton and M. Dewatripont, Contract theory. MIT press, 2005. [24] F. Facchinei and C. Kanzow, “Generalized nash equilibrium problems,”
4or, vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 173–210, 2007. [25] S. Stan´czak, M. Wiczanowski, and H. Boche, Chapter 2: On the Positive
Solution to a Linear System with Nonnegative Coefﬁcients. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2006, pp. 51–68. [26] S. Park, “Existence theorems for generalized nash equilibrium problems,” Banged Int. J. Math & Comp. Sci., vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 42–51, apr 2015.

[27] T. Roughgarden, “Routing games,” in Algorithmic game theory. Cambridge University Press, 2007, ch. 18, pp. 461–486.
Tyler Westenbroek is a graduate student at the University of California, Berkeley, pursuing a Ph.D. in Electrical Engineering and Computer Science. He graduated, with top honors, from Washington University in Saint Louis, receiving a B.S. (2016) with majors in Systems Engineering and Computer Science. His interests lie primarily in the areas of Hybrid Systems, Optimal Control, and Optimization.

Foundation

Graduate

Roy Dong is a Research Assistant Professor in the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. He was a postdoctoral researcher and visiting lecturer at University of California, Berkeley from 2017 to 2018, where he also received his Ph.D. in Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences in 2017. Prior to his graduate studies, he received a B.S. Honors in Economics and a B.S. Honors in Computer Engineering from Michigan State University in 2010. He is the recipient of the National Science Research Fellowship (2011).

Lillian J. Ratliff (S’08–M’15) is an Assistant Professor in Electrical Engineering (EE) at the University of Washington, Seattle. Prior to joining UW she was a Postdoctoral Researcher in Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences at the University of California, Berkeley where she also obtained her Ph.D. in 2015. She obtained a B.S. in Mathematics (2008) and a B.S. (2008) and M.S. (2010) in EE all from the University of Nevada, Las Vegas. Her research interests lie at the intersection of game theory, optimization, and learning. She is the recipient of the National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship (2009) and the CISE Research Initiation Initiative Award (2017).

S. Shankar Sastry (S’79–M’80–SM’95–F’95) is with the University of California, Berkeley where he is faculty director of the Blum Center for Developing Economies. He served as the Dean of Berkeley’s College of Engineering from 2007-2018. He received his B. Tech from the Indian Institute of Technology, and M.S., M.A. (Math), Ph.D. in Engineering from Berkeley. He has served on the faculties of MIT and Harvard. His areas of personal research are design of resilient network control systems, autonomous systems, computer vision, nonlinear and adaptive control, and hybrid and embedded systems. He is also a member of the National Academy of Engineering and the American Academy of Arts and Sciences. He received an honorary M.A. from Harvard and honorary doctorates from the Royal Swedish Institute of Technology and the University of Waterloo. He has been a member of the Air Force Scientiﬁc Advisory Board and the Defense Science Board, among other national boards. He is a member of the UN Secretary General’s Scientiﬁc Advisory Board. He has coauthored over 550 technical papers and 9 books. He has supervised over 85 doctoral students and over 50 MS students. His students now occupy leadership roles in several places and on the faculties of many major universities in the United States and abroad.

