Scheduling Broadcasts in a Network of Timelines

Emaad Manzoor∗
Carnegie Mellon University Pittsburgh, USA
emaad@cmu.edu

Haewoon Kwak
Qatar Computing Research Institute
Doha, Qatar
hkwak@qf.org.qa

Panos Kalnis
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology Thuwal, Saudi Arabia
panos.kalnis@kaust.edu.sa

arXiv:1610.06052v1 [cs.SI] 19 Oct 2016

ABSTRACT
Broadcasts and timelines are the primary mechanism of information exchange in online social platforms today. Services like Facebook, Twitter and Instagram have enabled ordinary people to reach large audiences spanning cultures and countries, while their massive popularity has created increasingly competitive marketplaces of attention. Timing broadcasts to capture the attention of such geographically diverse audiences has sparked interest from many startups and social marketing gurus. However, formal study is lacking on both the timing and frequency problems. We study for the ﬁrst time the broadcast scheduling problem of specifying the timing and frequency of publishing content to maximise the attention received.
We validate and quantify three interacting behavioural phenomena to parametrise social platform users: information overload, bursty circadian rhythms and monotony aversion, which is deﬁned here for the ﬁrst time. We formalise a timeline information exchange process based on these phenomena, and formulate an objective function that quantiﬁes the expected collective attention. We ﬁnally present experiments on real data from Twitter, where we discover a counter-intuitive scheduling strategy that outperforms popular heuristics while producing fewer posts.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.2.8 [Database Applications]: Data mining
Keywords
Broadcast scheduling, monotony aversion
1. INTRODUCTION
The advent of social publishing platforms has democratised the attention economy, once a monopoly of radio, television and print media powerhouses. Social platforms have
∗Research performed while the author was graduate student at King Abdullah University of Science and Technology.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission and/or a fee. KDD ’15 Sydney, Australia Copyright 20XX ACM X-XXXXX-XX-X/XX/XX ...$15.00.

100%

0%

ATTENTION (a)

q’s TIMELINE POST BY USER p

0%

100%

IRRITATION (b)

POST BY OTHER USER

MON TUE WED THU FRI SAT SUN
12AM

TWEET SENT
6AM 12PM 6PM 12AM
BURSTY CIRCADIAN RHYTHMS (c)

Figure 1: Information overload, monotony aversion and bursty circadian rhythms.

emerged for publishing images (Flickr, Instagram), video (Vine) and a hybrid of both (Facebook, Twitter). A distinctive commonality among these platforms is their mechanism of information exchange, which is primarily via the combination of broadcasts and timelines.
The typical social platform user composes “posts”, subscribes to posts from other users by “following” them, propagates posts to her subscribers by “resharing” them, and reacts to posts via “likes” or “favourites”. These actions are instantly broadcast to all her subscribers and appear as a sequence of posts on their timelines. Timelines are traditionally ordered reverse-chronologically as in Twitter, Vine and Instagram. They may also be ordered by a mixture of recency and social metrics, as in Facebook. The timeline is each user’s personalised entry point and primary means of engagement with the social platform.
The massive popularity of social platforms has led to the production of large and fast torrents of information. Users, ever in search of novel and interesting content, subscribe to new information inﬂows without restraint [17]. They are soon overwhelmed when their cognitive information processing limits are exceeded by their subscribed inﬂow, and enter a state of information overload. A distinctive symptom of this state is the partial consumption of timelines; posts too low in the timeline often go unseen. With audiences shared across multiple content producers, this results in a marketplace of attention that is growing increasingly competitive.
Concretely, competing content producers vie for the highest slots in each user’s timeline. In unicast mediums like

email, it is easy to place a message near the top of a target’s mailbox by simply sending it just before she checks her email. The scenario in social platforms is challenging for two reasons. The ﬁrst is user diversity; subscribers may have varying periods of activity on the social platform, observed as bursty circadian rhythms. The second is the restriction to broadcasts; a post timing conﬁguration aﬀects all subscribers, and must hence strike a balance between them.
Many commercial oﬀerings have sprung up that enable scheduling posts, from established giants like Twitter1 to startups like Buﬀer2 and HootSuite3. A common practice is to visualise subscriber activity as a 2-D histogram across days of the week and allocate posts to the time slots that appear most active. This is lacking in the following ways: it does not specify the post frequency in a time slot, it ignores competing content producers, and it becomes increasingly useless as subscriber diversity increases. Indeed, the strategy makes no attempt at quantifying the “goodness” of a timing conﬁguration and serves only as a rough heuristic.
Another possible strategy is to broadcast rapidly in all time slots, ﬂooding the timelines of all subscribers and ﬂushing competitors out. This guarantees attention, but has been observed to irritate users, who may ignore [11, 10] or even break ties [25] with the oﬀending content producer. We attribute this irritation to an increase in the timeline monotony of subscribers who prefer novel content, and term this phenomenon monotony aversion.
These three key phenomena: bursty circadian rhythms, monotony aversion and information overload are what necessitate scheduling broadcasts. Their interaction is illustrated in Figure 1. Depicted is the timeline of a user q containing posts by user p among others. Also indicated is her variation in (a) attention and (b) irritation as she consumes her timeline from the top downwards. Due to information overload, her attention decreases with timeline depth. She is also irritated by closely-spaced clusters of tweets from the same user p. Due to her workday and biological sleep-cycle, her tweeting activity exhibits bursty circadian rhythms (c): she usually tweets at around 6PM, followed by a long period of inactivity while she is at work or asleep.
In this ﬁrst work on scheduling broadcasts in a network of timelines, we study the problem of allocating a content producer’s posts to time slots to maximise the overall attention expected from a given set of subscribers. To quantify the expected attention, we deﬁne the attention potential of a schedule as a function of (i) the degree of information overload, (ii) the degree of monotony aversion and (iii) the position of the post on the timeline of each subscriber, which depends on the subscribers’ and competitors’ activity patterns. The link between schedules, activity patterns and obtained attention potentials depends on the speciﬁc information exchange process in the network.
A complete formulation of this information exchange process is nontrivial. Timeline construction involves complex temporal interactions between the content producers, subscribers and competitors. Timeline consumption behaviours vary across users with diﬀerent behavioural characteristics. None of these behaviours can be directly quantiﬁed, and inferring attention from observable signals such as retweets,
1https://archive.today/q1RFb 2https://archive.today/nIQnb 3https://archive.today/WjHZZ

likes and comments tends to be an underestimate [6]. Hence, we focus on data-driven analyses of social activity
traces to validate the existence of these behaviours and evaluate their signiﬁcance. This provides both an understanding of the strength and nature of their inﬂuence on attention.
In summary, we make the following contributions:
• We validate the existence of bursty circadian rhythms in microblogs by studying the distribution of time between consecutive tweets in Sina Weibo. The distribution reveals a pattern that is characteristic of bursty behaviour modulated by circadian rhythms.
• We deﬁne the concept of monotony aversion and study its impact on attention towards posts. Using data from Twitter, we show that “closely spaced” posts on timelines tend to be skipped over inattentively. We also show that posts lower on the timeline can aﬀect the attention attainable by ones above, suggesting that timelines are consumed in chunks rather than as sequential independent posts. This quantiﬁcation has potentially deep-rooted connections to consumer psychology, recommendation diversity and variety-seeking behaviour, which we detail in the related work section.
• Grounded in these observations, we formulate the process of information exchange in timelines and deﬁne an objective function that captures the attention potential of a schedule. This function quantiﬁes the relationships observed between attention, information overload, monotony aversion and bursty circadian rhythms. We then formulate the broadcast scheduling problem as a nonlinear integer program and discuss algorithmic approaches to solve it.
• We analyse a dataset from Twitter and study the attention potential of some popular heuristic schedules. Using the method of marginal allocation, we discover an alternate schedule that, counter-intuitively, outperforms the heuristics while producing fewer posts. Further analysis reveals an intuitive basis for this schedule, arising from a preference to avoid competition while inducing lesser irritation.
2. FACTORS INFLUENCING ATTENTION
It is not immediately obvious why scheduling would beneﬁt a content producer in a social network. Indeed, in the case of social network accounts of news providers, timing seems to be irrelevant. News is traditionally broadcast soon after it breaks, and is actively seeked out and shared across the network. A similar situation is likely in the case of celebrities, with fans constantly on the lookout for personal and professional updates.
Such users are advanced enough in the attention economy to command visibility solely by virtue of their identity, but they are not the focus of our work. Instead, we consider the case of the average social network user: one who is prone to being ignored, unfriended and unfollowed at whim. The average user’s place in a networked attention economy is inﬂuenced by three key behavioural phenomena, which we detail further in this section.

(a)

(b)

P(τ ) ONE DAY
ONE WEEK ONE MONTH P(τ )
7 HOURS

100

100

10−1

10−2 10−3

10−1

10−4 10−5

10−2

10−6 10−7

10−3

10−8 α = −1.33
10−190−1 100 101 102 103 104 10−140−1 τ

(c)

100

101

τ

(d)

Figure 2: Weibo activity for 12 users with the largest number of tweets for the (a) ﬁrst and (b) last 2 weeks of 2012. Distribution of the time in hours (τ ) between consecutive tweets for (c) all τ and (d) τ < 1 day.

2.1 Information Overload
Information overload has been a subject of intense study in the domains of psychology, sociology and marketing even before the information age [14]. In computer science, it has increasingly been a subject of research on data mining and human-computer interaction [30], on recommender systems as choice overload [7], and on social networks, which we discuss further below.
Information overload arises from exposure to information in excess of one’s cognitive processing limit. In social networks, this may be caused by subscribing to either a single overly active user, or to many users whose collective information output causes overload. Hence, research on information overload in social networks has proceeded in two directions. One explores the existence of a cognitive limit on the number of stable social ties that can be maintained at a time and studies how users allocate attention across them [5, 18]. The other considers the allocation of attention across items of information. Our interest is in the latter, speciﬁcally on attention towards posts on social network timelines.
Oral and eye-tracking surveys [11] have reported decreased attention towards information appearing lower on timelines. When timelines are ordered chronologically, it becomes essential to time posts to appear near the top in order to guarantee attention. We do not perform further validation of this phenomenon ourselves, and instead adopt the ﬁndings of a recent large-scale analysis of information overload on Twitter [17]. Speciﬁcally, we note that the probability of retweeting a tweet decreases monotonically with the tweet’s depth in the timeline.
2.2 Bursty Circadian Rhythms
Humans have been observed to exhibit bursts while performing sequential tasks in a number of diﬀerent settings. Such behaviour is characterised by short sessions of high activity followed by long periods of inactivity, giving rise to interevent time distributions that follow a power law. The circadian cycle is also a powerful factor that modulates human behaviour, externally exhibited as rhythms of activity inﬂuenced by the biological clock and workday routine. The inﬂuence of circadian rhythms have been observed in situations as diverse as diurnal mood changes on Twitter [16], patterns of Wikipedia edit activity [33] and mobile phone communication [20].
The combination of bursty activity and circadian rhythms gives rise to interevent time distributions with distinct regularities. The distributions follow a similar power-law curve

to that arising from bursty activity, but are characterised by systematic deviations from the curve at 24 hour intervals. This pattern has been observed in a few large-scale studies on online user behaviour, including ones on user activity on a social network [9] and posting behaviour on a blog portal [23].
Microblogs diﬀer from traditional content-sharing mediums in their intrinsically real-time nature and hard restrictions on content length. A majority of microblogging is done via smartphones4, and users often report events soon after they occur. However, we failed to ﬁnd prior work probing microblogs for patterns of bursty circadian rhythms. Hence, we look for evidence by exploring the behaviour of users on Sina Weibo, a popular Chinese microblogging platform.
Dataset. We use the Weiboscope dataset [15], which contains over 13 million tweets posted by over 14 million users spanning the entire year 2012. All users in this dataset had over 1000 followers at the time of data collection, which limits the likelihood of accounts belonging to spammers. In comparison with the literature mentioned earlier in this section, this is a relatively large and temporally extensive dataset. Hence, we expect our ﬁndings to reasonably reﬂect general trends of human behaviour on microblogs.
To gain some initial intuition, we visualize the tweeting activity of the top 12 (arbitrarily chosen) most active users for the ﬁrst (Figure 2(a)) and last (Figure 2(b)) two weeks of 2012. We observe three broad activity patterns. A few users appear to be inactive, while a few tweet throughout the day. For the remaining majority, bursty behaviour is evident with sessions of activity preceding long intervals of inactivity. The bursts also appear to be periodic, with inactivity recurring during the same intervals of time every day.
We now look for the characteristic patterns arising from the combination of bursty activity and circadian rhythms. Figure 2(c) depicts the distribution of the time τ between a user’s consecutive tweets for all users in the dataset. The plot follows a power-law, P (τ ) = τ −1.33 (estimated using powerlaw [2]), eventually terminating in a skewed curve with a heavy tail. The periodic deviations from the power law curve are distinctly visible. If we zoom in on the curve in the region τ < 1 day (Figure 2(d)), we notice a pair of local optima at τ = 7 and τ = 10 hours. These can be explained by considering the average workday that is 8-10 hours long; users are more likely to resume tweeting after work, leading to the local maximum after the minimum at
4https://archive.today/kNNLe

CLUSTER C CLUSTER B CLUSTER A

POST BY USER p 1
POST BY OTHER USER
INDEPENDENT CONSUMPTION HYPOTHESIS 1 2

0%

100%

IRRITATION

0%

1

IRRITATION 100%

CHUNKED CONSUMPTION HYPOTHESIS

CLUSTER D

1 (a)

0%

100%

IRRITATION

(b)

0%
IRRITATION 100%

Figure 3: (a) Clusters and the cluster positions of each producer tweet and (b) the two hypotheses of monotony aversion.

τ = 7 hours. Prior works have studied and compared these distribu-
tions across many diﬀerent scenarios, mostly arriving at similar conclusions on the behavioural phenomena that generate them. The aforementioned local optima were also observed in an analysis of multiplayer gaming activity [28], similarly hypothesized as a result of the average workday. In a study on inter-visit time in the Korean social network Cyworld [9], the distribution curve is further dissected into three power-law regimes, and the phenomena giving rise to each of them are hypothesized and compared to other settings. For our purpose, it suﬃces to ﬁnd evidence that there exists an interval of time when the user is inactive, during which microblog posts from her followees will accumulate on her timeline without being seen. The observations discussed in this section strongly indicate the existence of such intervals.

2.3 Monotony Aversion
To maximise visibility in the face of limited attention in online social networks, a naive strategy is to rapidly broadcast, completely ﬁlling every follower’s timeline. This raises the concern of irritation on viewing a monotonous timeline dominated by a single user’s posts. The phenomenon of users exhibiting irritation with monotony, which we term monotony aversion, makes brief appearances in a number of scenarios.
An eye-tracking study of Twitter users viewing their timelines [11] reports decreased attention towards users whose tweets appear more than 5 times in a short viewing window. Facebook users too report similar feelings [24], stating that high posting frequencies tend to irritate them, especially when originating from weaker ties. At its extreme, irritation may result in breaking ties with the oﬀender, which terminates the inﬂow of information from that user regardless of the tweet content [25].
We thus suspect closely-spaced posts on a user’s timeline to irritate her by reducing her timeline’s diversity. Now we study the mechanisms behind this phenomenon by observing how users’ reactions vary across tweets in diﬀerent spacing conﬁgurations on the timeline.
Deﬁnitions. We deﬁne a cluster as a group of consecutive tweets on a timeline having the same author, termed the cluster author. The cluster size is then the number of

Cluster 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 >10

Size

# Reactions 15897 2756 710 304 126 79 54 21 16 15 28

# Total 8435832 1819014 586665 243536 126125 72486 49119 26376 17019 13600 49673

Tweets

Table 1: Twitter-Friends tweet cluster statistics.

tweets in a cluster. The cluster position of a tweet is its distance from the top of the cluster downwards, such that the chronologically newest tweet is at cluster position 1. These deﬁnitions are illustrated in Figure 3(a), which depicts the clusters A, B, C and D of size 1, 2, 1 and 1 respectively, and the cluster position of each tweet by p.
Since a tweet that is retweeted or replied to must have been viewed, we use these reactions to tweets as a proxy for attention. This is a conservative measure because users generally react to only a small fraction of the tweets that they view. This is evident in the small reaction probabilities that show up in our forthcoming experiments.
Dataset. We use the Twitter-Friends dataset [26], consisting of a follow-graph induced by 822 users with 56,286 links and all the tweets posted by them in the year 2011. The network is dense, with most users being current or former Twitter employees and active Twitter users. We deliberately restrict our attention to regular individuals whose tweets may or may not receive attention. In contrast, tweets by special users such as celebrities and news channels are actively seeked out by fans and would beneﬁt little from scheduling. Since each tweet is timestamped, we can construct the entire timeline for any user by aggregating and reverse-chronologically sorting all the tweets by the users she follows. Hence, for any tweet on a user’s timeline, we can calculate its cluster size and cluster position by looking at the authors of its neighbouring tweets. Since the graph may have evolved during 2011, our timeline reconstruction is noisy and potentially inaccurate. Table 1 displays some statistics of the tweet clusters in this dataset.
We want to observe if and how the cluster size and cluster position of a tweet inﬂuence its chances of being reacted to. Let R ∈ {T rue, F alse} be the event of a reaction and C the cluster size. We ﬁrst focus on the empirical probability of a tweet obtaining a reaction given its cluster size, P (R|C), depicted by the dotted line in Figure 5. We can see that the chances of a reaction reduce as the cluster size increases, suggesting that to obtain more retweets or replies, it is wise to enforce a delay between consecutive tweets. This will allow other users to intersperse their tweets between yours and keep the cluster size low.
However, it is possible that this decrease in reactions is simply due to the relative rarity of larger clusters. Hence, we conduct a statistical randomisation test that indicates with high conﬁdence that the decrease in reaction cannot be due to chance. The observed test statistic is shown in Table 4(a). We generate 1000 random permutations of tweets across cluster sizes to construct our null models and compute

i=1 i=2 i=3 i=4

j=1 -

j=2 0.0004
-

j=3 0.0007 0.0003
-

j=4
0.0006 0.0003 −5.7 × 10−5
-

j=5 0.0009 0.0005 0.0002 0.0003

i=1 i=2 i=3 i=4

j=1 -

j=2 0.001
-

j=3 0.001 0.001
-

j=4 0.001 0.019 0.669
-

j=5 0.001 0.001 0.109 0.077

(a)

(b)

Figure 4: The observed test statistic (a) and p-values for the null hypothesis (b). Cell (i, j) contains (a) Tobs(i, j) = P (R|C = i) − P (R|C = j) and (b) the probability that Tobs(i, j) is due to chance, where R is the event of a reaction and C is the cluster size. Bold probabilities are signiﬁcant (p < 0.05).

0.0024 0.0022 0.0020 0.0018

Any position Position 1 Position 2 Position 3 Position 4

P(R|C)

0.0016

0.0014

0.0012

0.00101

2

3

4

5

Cluster Size C

Figure 5: The probability of being reacted to given the cluster size. The dotted line shows this probability across all cluster positions, while the solid lines show this probability given a ﬁxed cluster position.

p-values, shown in Table 4(b). We can thus be reasonably conﬁdent that P (R|C = 1) > P (R|C = 2) > P (R|C = 3). However, when comparing reaction probabilities between clusters of size 3, 4 and 5, we can no longer reject the null hypothesis. This may explain the noisy disruption in trends for C > 3 in Figure 5. However, clusters with C > 3 give rise to less than 0.5% of all tweets on the timelines in this dataset, so our hypothesis holds for the large majority that remains. A potential root cause of large clusters in our data is noise; tweets missing in the data could have broken large clusters into smaller ones had they been present.
We now focus on the following question: are the chances of a reaction aﬀected by the number of tweets below it in the same cluster? We would not expect this if users consume tweets sequentially and independently, which we term the independent consumption hypothesis. However, the solid lines in Figure 5 indicate that, given a ﬁxed cluster position, reaction probability decreases with increasing cluster size. This supports the alternative chunked consumption hypothesis, illustrated in Figure 3(a). Speciﬁcally, one cannot tweet creating large clusters and still expect the newest tweets in that cluster to command the same attention; there is a reasonable chance of the user skipping over the entire cluster of tweets in irritation.
The results above quantitatively validate the presence of irritation and loss of attention reported by earlier qualitative studies. They reveal the trade-oﬀ that a broadcaster must make between creating large and visible but irritating clusters, and small, less visible clusters that command more attention. While our results suggest that the irritated user

inattentively skims over oﬀending tweet clusters, large tweet bursts have been reported [25] as the most common reason to unfollow someone on Twitter. Hence, it is essential for a broadcast scheduling algorithm to intelligently control the perceived spacing of tweets on followers’ timelines.
3. THE BROADCAST SCHEDULING PROBLEM
In the previous section, we found that users in microblogs exhibit bursty circadian rhythms. We also found that users exhibit monotony aversion, which manifests itself as reduced attention towards large clusters of posts on timelines. We know that users exhibit information overload, only partially consuming their timelines. These phenomena interact to give rise to the broadcast scheduling problem, which we detail further in this section.
The interplay between the actions of the following entities in the social network collectively leads to the construction of each follower’s timeline:
1. The producer, whose schedule we wish to optimise.
2. Followers, who follow the producer.
3. Competitors, who are followed by the followers.
The producer has partial control over each follower’s timeline and, together with the competitors, constructs the follower’s timeline as a reverse-chronologically ordered sequence of posts. The restriction to broadcasts enforces having a single schedule that impacts all followers. Hence, this schedule must maximise attention by striking a balance between followers with diﬀerent competitors, circadian rhythms and degrees of information overload and monotony aversion.
To formalise the interactions between the producer, followers and competitors, we begin this section by describing the timeline information exchange process. This links the locations of posts on timelines to the behaviour of the producer, followers and competitors. We introduce behavioural parameters for each follower quantifying their circadian rhythms, monotony aversion and information overload. We then introduce survival functions for each follower and post, and relate them to the notion of the attention potential of a post. We ﬁnally arrive at an objective function quantifying the attention potential of a schedule, which we characterise and discuss algorithmic approaches to optimise.
3.1 Timeline Information Exchange
We ﬁrst focus on the behaviour of the producer who desires a schedule specifying how many posts to broadcast at each instant of the day. We assume this schedule is repeated

p x0 x1 x2
c c0 c1 c2
Producer/Competitor Schedules (a)

c c v01

1 2 v00

x x x01

1 2 x00

c c v11

0 1 v10

x x x11

0 1 x10

c c v21

2 0 v20

x x x21

2 0 x20

Nomenclature (d)

u1 u0

u1 u0

c0 c1 c2 c0 c1 c2

x0 x1 x2 x0 x1 x2

c0 c1 c2 c0 c1

x0 x1 x2 x0 x1

c0 c1 c2 c0

x0 x1 x2 x0

c0 c1 c2

DAY 0 x x x

Timeline Construction (c)

0

1

2

c0 c1

u1

xx

0

1

p

c

c0

u

x0

0

Network (b)

DAY 1

Figure 6: Timeline Construction, Consumption and Nomenclature.

every day. This assumption is simplifying but not restric-

tive, since our formulation is valid for schedules that stretch

over periods of weeks or months as long as they recur after

this period. If we discretise a day into S time slots, a broad-

cast schedule is a set X = {x0, . . . , xS−1}, where xi ≥ 0 is

the number of posts broadcast in time slot i. Let N be the

number of posts intended to be broadcast each day. It may

not be optimal to broadcast all of one’s intended posts, so

S−1 i=0

xi

≤

N.

Competitors are considered separately for each follower,

since each follower may follow a diﬀerent set of users. We

count the total number of posts produced by all the com-

petitors for a given follower in a time slot. For time slot i

and follower j, we denote this number by cij, and we have

an aggregate competitors schedule Cj = {c0j , . . . , c(S−1)j }.

We consider the timeline construction process of a follower

j to happen as follows: in each time slot i, the producer ﬁrst

broadcasts xi posts, then the competitors collectively broad-

cast cij posts that appear above the producer’s posts in the

timeline by virtue of being more recent. The broadcasts

repeat similarly for slot i + 1, eventually wrapping around

to slot 0 at the start of the next day. The process contin-

ues indeﬁnitely, leading to an inﬁnite reverse-chronological

sequence of posts by the producer and competitors. This

sequence is the follower’s timeline.

Figure 6 illustrates this process. Depicted is a network

(b) with a single competitor c with 2 followers u0 and u1.

There are 3 slots time slots (S = 3). The producer schedule

X and competitor schedule C are depicted in (a). Since both

followers have the same competitors, we drop the subscript

j for the competitor schedule, and the timeline construction

process (c) is common to both.

We now focus on the behaviour of the followers. We as-

sume that followers login to the social platform and consume

their timelines once in a day. Concretely, follower j logs in at

the end of time slot σj ∈ {0, . . . , S − 1} and begins consum-

ing her timeline from the top downwards, eventually quitting

the timeline by stopping consumption after reaching some

speciﬁc depth.

In the case of Twitter, a graphical marker denotes the

depth after which there are posts that have already been

viewed. The post right after marker was, in fact, the ﬁrst

post on the timeline when the follower logged in previously.

Hence, we assume that the follower never scrolls past this

marker, though she may quit the timeline much before reach-

Model Exponential Geometric Weibull Log-logistic
Rayleigh

Survival Function
e−λx (1 − λ)x e−λxp 1/(1 + λxp) e−x2 /2λ2

Parameters λ>0 0<λ≤1 λ > 0, p > 0 λ > 0, p > 0
λ>0

Table 2: Common survival models, deﬁned for x ≥ 0.

ing this far. The order and frequency of posts that the follower views
on her timeline remains the same on each login (on average, since each Cj is an estimate from historical observations). These posts appear in groups called clusters, placed on the timeline by the producer and competitors in an interleaved manner. Let there be xij producer posts in the cluster at position i (from the top) for follower j, and vij competitor posts right above it. We will relate the number of posts in a cluster with the producer and aggregate competitor schedules later in this section.
Figure 6 illustrates this nomenclature and the timeline consumption process. Followers u0 and u1 log in at time slot 2 and 1 respectively (σ0 = 2, σ1 = 1). On day 0, u1 consumes her timeline (marked in green) in time slot 1 for the ﬁrst time, which stabilises on day 2 and remains the same every day henceforth. Similarly, u0 consumes her timeline (marked in blue) in time slot 2. The timelines viewed by each follower on every login on are depicted in (d), with the number of posts in each cluster labelled according to our nomenclature.
Having formalised the process governing the position of each post in relation to the producer and aggregate competitor schedules, we can now continue towards deﬁning the attention potential of each post on a timeline.
3.2 Attention Potential
The extent to which a follower scrolls down the timeline depends on her degree of information overload. We deﬁne a parameter ρj ∈ [0, 1] for each follower j that captures her intrinsic tendency to quit consuming the timeline. ρj ∈ {0, 1} correspond to full and no timeline consumption, respectively. We consider a follower as having survived until depth d if she scrolls down at least until the dth post. We deﬁne a follower survival function F (d; ρj) that quantiﬁes the probability of the follower j surviving until depth d.
Similarly, we also discuss the notion of cluster survival. We consider a cluster of posts as having survived for a speciﬁc follower if it has not been skipped over by that follower in irritation. To capture the intrinsic tendency of a follower j to be irritated, we deﬁne a parameter δj ∈ [0, 1]. δj ∈ {0, 1} correspond to always and never skipping clusters, respectively. We deﬁne a cluster survival function C(x; δj) that quantiﬁes the probability of a cluster with x posts surviving follower j.
The choice of models for follower and cluster survival may depend on the speciﬁc social platform under study, or behavioural characteristics of the follower population. There are a number of models and survival functions frequently used in survival and reliability analysis, some of which are mentioned in Table 2.
We now introduce the concept of attention potential. For a single post at depth d in the timeline to be viewed by a follower, the follower must (i) consume the timeline until

depth d, and (ii) not skip the cluster containing this post. Concretely, a post is given attention if the follower survives until that post and the cluster containing that post survives for that follower. Since these events are independent, the probability of this happening is given by F (d; ρj)C(x; δj). This is the attention potential of a post at depth d for follower j. The attention potential of a cluster is the sum of attention potentials of the posts within it. Given a cluster containing xij posts, let there be a total of zij posts on the timeline above the ﬁrst post in this cluster. The attention potential of this cluster is given by the following function of the producer schedule:

xij

fij (X) = C(xij ; δj ) R(zij + k; ρj )

(1)

k=1

The number of posts above the ﬁrst post in the cluster is:

i−1

i

zij =

xmj + vnj

(2)

m=0

n=0

What remains is to derive the number of producer posts xij and competitor posts vij in the cluster from the producer schedule X and aggregate competitor schedules Cj respectively. The following relations hold:

xij = x((σj −i) mod S)

(3)

vij = c((σj −i) mod S)j

(4)

Where mod is the binary modulus operator that returns the

remainder when its second argument is divided by the ﬁrst.

The attention potential of the timeline constructed for

a follower j is the sum of attention potentials of all the

producer’s clusters,

S−1 i=0

fij

(X).

Each timeline may be

weighted by a factor γj encoding a preference for speciﬁc

characteristics, such as inﬂuence or tendency to retweet.

The attention potential of a schedule is the sum of atten-

tion potentials of all timelines:

S−1 U −1

F (X) =

fij (X)

(5)

i=0 j=0

The attention potential objective captures two forms of balance. The ﬁrst is, for a single follower, the balance between annoying and attracting that follower’s attention. The second balance is between followers with varied behavioural characteristics and activity times. An optimal schedule maximises attention potential by ﬁnding the perfect post timing and frequency conﬁguration satisfying both these balances. We can succinctly write this optimisation problem as the following nonlinear integer program:

maximise X
subject to

F (X)
xi ≤ N,
xi ∈X
X ⊆ ZS+.

The form of the program reveals that it is an instance of the nonlinear knapsack problem [8]. Our speciﬁc objective function is non-separable: it cannot be decomposed into a linear combination of functions gi(xi), separate for each dimension. Additionally, it is nonconcave in general over the reals. This places the problem outside the realm for which eﬃcient general algorithms have been devised.
Greedily exploring the discrete state space is a common local optimisation strategy. For constrained integer programs, greedy algorithms are typically applications of the method of marginal allocation. When adapted to our problem, this corresponds to the following algorithm:
Algorithm 1: Marginal Allocation
Input: Constraint N , initial solution X0 ∈ ZS+ begin
Y ←− X0 ∆ ←− 0 repeat
i ←− argmaxk F (Y + ek) − F (Y) Yprev ←− Y Y ←− Y + ei ∆ ←− Y − Yprev until ∆ ≤ 0 or y∈Y y > N return Yprev end

Here,

ek

∈

S
Z+

is

the

kth

unit

vector.

In each iteration,

the algorithm adds a single post to the slot which results

in the maximum increase in the objective function value. It

terminates when adding a post to any slot either violates

the total intended posts constraint or does not improve the

objective function value. Essentially, this is a hill-climbing

algorithm starting from the initial solution and is guaranteed

to terminate at an optimum, which may be local.

4. EXPERIMENTS
In practice, social media marketers use a number of popular scheduling heuristics5 designed to optimise for attention. Using a real-world dataset from Twitter, we analyse the impact of these heuristics on the attention potential they obtain for a speciﬁc user in the dataset. Through our analyses, we discover an alternate scheduling strategy that obtains a comparatively greater attention potential while broadcasting fewer posts than the heuristic strategies.
We ﬁrst select a producer whose scheduling options will be the focus of this section. We consider users with a large number of followers in the Twitter-Friends dataset described earlier (§2.3) in order to obtain a follower population exhibiting diverse behavioural characteristics. We also prefer users with a large number of tweets, which will aid in the behavioural parameter estimation described later in this section. We found a single user with both a large number of followers and tweets, who we adopt as the producer.
We extract the 2-hop neighbourhood in the social graph starting from the producer and obtain a subgraph with 450 followers and 813 unique competitors (other users followed by the followers). We collect all the tweets in the dataset by these users, and set S = 24 to construct hourly schedules.
To understand the collective behaviour of this user population, we observe the daily tweeting activity of the followers
5https://archive.today/ykNb6

Followers Followers
Attention Potential

0000

0600

1200

1800

2300

0000

0600

1200

1800

2300

Time of Day

Time of Day

(a)

(b)

Figure 7: Hourly Twitter activity of the (a) followers and (b) competitors of the producer. Times are in Paciﬁc Standard Time (PST).

(Figure 7(a)) and competitors (Figure 7(b)) as a 2D histogram with hourly bins, mean-centered along each row. In both histograms, we see the most Twitter activity between 7AM and 5PM, a span of reduced activity between 6PM and 10PM and close to no activity between 11PM and 6AM. Interestingly, there is a dip in activity at 12PM, around lunchtime, which is distinctly visible in the competitor activity histogram. In fact, this has been recommended as one of the two best times to tweet6, attributed to people using Twitter after lunch and while commuting. Our histograms suggest that reduced competition may also be a factor contributing to the increased attention obtained during these time slots.
We now estimate the behavioural parameters for each follower. We can directly estimate the login time slot σ of a follower as the median start time slot across all days, where a start time slot is one in which a tweet has been posted after an inactive period of over 8 hours. The 8-hour assumption is supported by the local maximum observed in the intertweet time distribution on Weibo (§2.2).
We adopt geometric cluster and user survival functions and need to estimate their parameters from the data available. Since each user’s intrinsic degrees of monotony aversion and information overload are not directly available, we use the following surrogates. We estimate the degree of monotony aversion δ of a follower towards the producer as the weakness of the follower’s tie with the producer. This is supported by the ﬁnding that weaker ties induce more irritation [24]. We measure tie strength as the empirical probability of retweeting or replying to the producer.
Since our user survival function arises from a geometric distribution, we can consider its parameter ρ as the probability that the user stops consuming the timeline after reading a post. If we empirically calculate the average number of posts consumed by the user on each login as µ, the estimate for ρ is given by 1/(1 + µ).
Having estimated the followers’ behavioural parameters and competitors’ tweeting activity, we are now in a position to calculate the attention potential for a schedule. We evaluate the attention potentials of three scheduling heuristics along with a strategy that was surfaced from multiple runs of marginal allocation with various arbitrary initial schedules.
The uniform strategy advocates a ﬁxed number of posts in each time slot. This is often recommended in rudimentary infographics discussing the optimal post frequency for social
6https://archive.today/rsGXm

uniform
peak eyard grav smart
0000

4 3 2 1 0600 1200 1800 2300 0 Time of Day

0.14 0.12 0.10 0.08 0.06 0.04 0.02 0.00
uniform

peak graveyard smart

Figure 8: Post frequencies of 4 scheduling strategies and their total attention potential.

media marketers. In the peak strategy, posts are scheduled during the times of peak follower activity. The graveyard strategy is the complement of peak; posts are scheduled in the late night and early morning hours; often termed the “graveyard shift”. This is a strategy recommended to take advantage of the late-night infomercial eﬀect5. The smart strategy schedules posts during lunchtime and late night hours. Both the peak and smart strategies prefer times of reduced competition.
The post frequencies in each time slot and total attention potential of each schedule are depicted in Figure 8. Rather counter-intuitively, the smart strategy had largest attention potential with the least number of posts. The peak and graveyard strategies had similar attention potentials, indicating a close tie between optimising for follower activity and reduced competition. The uniform strategy had the least attention potential, possibly due to users being annoyed by the constant stream of posts.
To gain further insight, we observe the attention potential histograms. mean-centered along rows, for each of these strategies in Figure 9. Some interesting patterns emerge. Though tweets were broadcast throughout the day in the uniform strategy, they had the most attention potential only during the late hours of the night. Similarly, the peak strategy had the most attention potential in the late night and early morning hours, though most posts were published during the hours of peak follower activity. Competition appears to be a dominating inﬂuence on the attention attainable by this producer.
The value of broadcast scheduling is evident when comparing the attention potential histograms for the graveyard and smart strategies. Both strategies avoid competition. However, graveyard publishes relatively more posts, all of which are localised around the late night and early morning hours. smart distributes posts between the late night and lunchtime hours, with fewer posts overall than graveyard. Even with fewer posts, smart has a greater attention potential. This may be attributed to the careful selection of time slots to maximise attention, while keeping post frequency low to avoid irritation.
In summary, the experiments in this section demonstrate the potential impact of scheduling in an attention marketplace. They also demonstrate the process of applying our scheduling framework, including the estimation of behavioural parameters from observable surrogates, to gain insights into the suitability of diﬀerent scheduling strategies for the target follower population.

Followers Followers Followers Followers

0000

0600

1200

1800

2300

0000

0600

1200

1800

2300

0000

0600

1200

1800

2300

0000

0600

1200

1800

2300

Time of Day

Time of Day

Time of Day

Time of Day

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 9: Heatmaps of the attention potential obtained when posts are scheduled (a) uniformly across all times, (b) weighted towards times of peak activity, (c) weighted towards late night and early morning hours, and (d) weighted towards lunchtime, late night and early morning hours.

5. RELATED WORK
Broadcast scheduling techniques have been studied in the traditional attention marketplaces of television and radio programming [13, 31]. A rich assortment of strategies has evolved to deal with the problem of retaining attention and maximising advertising revenue in the face of competition. The schedules derived from these strategies often stretch over months or years, but have limited feedback on the actual attention they capture. Only recently has viewing data from set-top boxes been used to better model users and compute metrics such as audience externalities [32].
The advent of the web brought us ﬁne-grained traces of user attention and satisfaction in the form of clicks. This has enabled much work on the problem of maintaining the diversity and novelty of results returned by recommender systems [35] and search engines [1]. The desire for novelty has been studied extensively in the consumer research domain [21] and recently been mined and quantiﬁed in a number of heterogeneous domains online [34]. Maintaining novelty may conﬂict with the goal of maximising result accuracy, but surprisingly improves user satisfaction [27]. This aligns with our empirical ﬁndings on monotony aversion in timelines, suggesting similar roots in consumer psychology.
A related subject of recent study is the reconsumption of items after a gap of satiation or boredom [22, 4], which explores the temporal cycle of the perceived novelty of an item. The focus of the task is on predicting whether and after what time gap an item is reconsumed. Our scheduling problem can be considered a variant of this task that focuses on control, where the time gap between posts is adjusted to minimise boredom and maximise reconsumption.
The problem of Stream-Advertising [19] is closely related. It considers a geometric decay in the reward of an advertisement with depth in the timeline, and formulates the problem as that of matching ads to slots on the timeline to maximise the total reward. The formulation explicitly prohibits consecutive ads on the timeline and ignores user irritation. Introducing our quantiﬁcation of monotony into the Stream-Advertising problem and validating the modelaˆA˘ Z´s performance on real-world data could be an interesting line of future work.
Directly related to us is the problem of timing tweets to increase information campaign eﬀectiveness [12]. This work is the ﬁrst to formalise the tweet timing problem, frame it as a Markov decision process and present a few oﬄine algo-

rithms to solve it. It also discusses user irritation. However, it restricts focus to the binary decision of whether to tweet in a given time slot. Hence, it fails to address the post frequency problem. Irritation is also a considered a discrete state of the user, which increments in unit steps for each tweet by the producer that is not responded to. This model of irritation is unintuitive and remains unvalidated.
Tangentially relevant are a series of works that consider competition over timelines through the lens of game theory [3, 29]. These works decompose user behaviour into random processes, formulate timeline information exchange as a game and study its equilibria. Numerical results are presented with some real data being used for parameter estimation. The focus is heavily on analysis and not on control, and hence remains disconnected from the scheduling problem.
6. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
We have formulated the broadcast scheduling problem that speciﬁes when and how much to broadcast in a social network with timelines, given a set of followers and competitors with varying behavioural characteristics. The process of timeline information exchange formulated here combines user behavioural phenomena and quantiﬁes their connection with a post’s position on the timeline and the attention it is expected to receive. We also introduce and quantify monotony aversion for the ﬁrst time, noting its inﬂuence in a number of diverse domains. We present experiments on data from Twitter analysing the attention potential of a number of heuristic schedules, and discover an alternate schedule via marginal allocation. This schedule outperforms the heuristics with fewer posts and has a sound intuitive basis, which is to prefer reduced competition while also limiting the amount of irritation induced.
Being the ﬁrst work on this problem, there are a number of lines directly related to the problem along which progress could be fruitful. One of these is to extend the timeline information exchange process to accommodate multiple login times; this will eﬀectively introduce more than one timeline for each user, corresponding to each login time slot. A continuous formulation in the form of random processes to replace discrete time slots is another direction worth pursuing. Extending the objective to be the “organic reach” by considering the spread of posts through the network may also be of interest.
While indirectly related, further study on monotony aver-

sion is an exciting direction; there is room for a well-founded connection to be made between oﬄine consumer behaviour, traditionally observed in physical markets, and online behaviour during the consumption of information. The diﬀerences are as important as the similarities: information arrives at a much faster pace than product purchase decisions, which may lead to signiﬁcant behavioural diﬀerences. Additionally, there is no work quantifying the relation between monotony aversion and breaking ties, though a connection has been conjectured [25].
7. REFERENCES
[1] R. Agrawal, S. Gollapudi, A. Halverson, and S. Ieong. Diversifying search results. WSDM ’09.
[2] J. Alstott, E. Bullmore, and D. Plenz. powerlaw: A python package for analysis of heavy-tailed distributions. PLoS ONE, 9(1), 01.
[3] E. Altman and N. Shimkin. Strategic posting times over a shared publication medium. NetGCOOP aˆA˘ Z´14.
[4] A. Anderson, R. Kumar, A. Tomkins, and S. Vassilvitskii. The dynamics of repeat consumption. WWW ’14.
[5] L. Backstrom, E. Bakshy, J. M. Kleinberg, T. M. Lento, and I. Rosenn. Center of attention: How facebook users allocate attention across friends. ICWSM ’11.
[6] M. S. Bernstein, E. Bakshy, M. Burke, and B. Karrer. Quantifying the invisible audience in social networks. CHI ’13.
[7] D. Bollen, B. P. Knijnenburg, M. C. Willemsen, and M. Graus. Understanding choice overload in recommender systems. RecSys ’10.
[8] K. M. Bretthauer and B. Shetty. The nonlinear knapsack problem–algorithms and applications. European Journal of Operational Research, 138(3):459–472, 2002.
[9] H. Chun, H. Kwak, Y.-H. Eom, Y.-Y. Ahn, S. Moon, and H. Jeong. Comparison of online social relations in volume vs interaction: a case study of cyworld. SIGCOMM ’08.
[10] G. Comarela, M. Crovella, V. Almeida, and F. Benevenuto. Understanding factors that aﬀect response rates in twitter. HT ’12.
[11] S. Counts and K. Fisher. Taking it all in? visual attention in microblog consumption. ICWSM ’11.
[12] O. Dabeer, P. Mehendale, A. Karnik, and A. Saroop. Timing tweets to increase eﬀectiveness of information campaigns. ICWSM ’11.
[13] S. Eastman and D. Ferguson. Media programming: Strategies and practices. Cengage Learning, 2012.
[14] M. J. Eppler and J. Mengis. The concept of information overload: A review of literature from organization science, accounting, marketing, mis, and related disciplines. The information society, 20(5):325–344, 2004.
[15] K.-w. Fu, C.-h. Chan, and M. Chau. Assessing censorship on microblogs in china: discriminatory keyword analysis and the real-name registration policy. Internet Computing ’13.

[16] S. A. Golder and M. W. Macy. Diurnal and seasonal mood vary with work, sleep, and daylength across diverse cultures. Science, 333(6051), 2011.
[17] M. Gomez-Rodriguez, K. P. Gummadi, and B. Sch¨olkopf. Quantifying information overload in social media and its impact on social contagions. ICWSM ’14.
[18] B. Gonc¸alves, N. Perra, and A. Vespignani. Modeling users’ activity on twitter networks: Validation of dunbar’s number. PloS One, 2011.
[19] S. Ieong, M. Mahdian, and S. Vassilvitskii. Advertising in a stream. WWW ’14.
[20] H.-H. Jo, M. Karsai, J. Kert´esz, and K. Kaski. Circadian pattern and burstiness in mobile phone communication. New Journal of Physics, 2012.
[21] B. E. Kahn. Consumer variety-seeking among goods and services: An integrative review. Journal of Retailing and Consumer Services, 2(3), 1995.
[22] K. Kapoor, K. Subbian, J. Srivastava, and P. Schrater. Just in time recommendations: Modeling the dynamics of boredom in activity streams. WSDM ’15.
[23] J. Kim, D. Lee, and B. Kahng. Microscopic modelling circadian and bursty pattern of human activities. PloS one, 2013.
[24] K. Koroleva, H. Krasnova, and O. Gu¨nther. Cognition or aﬀect? Exploring information processing on Facebook. Springer, 2011.
[25] H. Kwak, H. Chun, and S. Moon. Fragile online relationship: a ﬁrst look at unfollow dynamics in twitter. CHI ’11.
[26] S. Lin, Q. Hu, F. Wang, and P. S. Yu. Steering information diﬀusion dynamically against user attention limitation. ICDM ’14.
[27] S. M. McNee, J. Riedl, and J. A. Konstan. Being accurate is not enough: How accuracy metrics have hurt recommender systems. CHI EA ’06.
[28] O. Mryglod, B. Fuchs, M. Szell, Y. Holovatch, and S. Thurner. Interevent time distributions of human multi-level activity in a virtual world. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications, 2015.
[29] A. Reiﬀers-Masson, E. Altman, and Y. Hayel. A time and space routing game model applied to visibility competition on online social networks. NETGCOOP ’14.
[30] D. Shahaf and C. Guestrin. Connecting the dots between news articles. KDD ’10.
[31] E. T. Vane. Programming for TV, radio, and cable. Taylor & Francis US, 1994.
[32] K. C. Wilbur, L. Xu, and D. Kempe. Correcting audience externalities in television advertising. Marketing Science, 32(6), Nov 2013.
[33] T. Yasseri, R. Sumi, and J. Kert´esz. Circadian patterns of wikipedia editorial activity: A demographic analysis. PloS One, 2012.
[34] F. Zhang, N. J. Yuan, D. Lian, and X. Xie. Mining novelty-seeking trait across heterogeneous domains. WWW ’14.
[35] C.-N. Ziegler, S. M. McNee, J. A. Konstan, and G. Lausen. Improving recommendation lists through topic diversiﬁcation. WWW ’05.

