Reviewer papers:
1. Title: Mapping state-sponsored information operations with multi-view modularity clustering
Abstract: This paper presents a new computational framework for mapping state-sponsored information operations into distinct strategic units. Utilizing a novel method called multi-view modularity clustering (MVMC), we identify groups of accounts engaged in distinct narrative and network information maneuvers. We then present an analytical pipeline to holistically determine their coordinated and complementary roles within the broader digital campaign. Applying our proposed methodology to disclosed Chinese state-sponsored accounts on Twitter, we discover an overarching operation to protect and manage Chinese international reputation by attacking individual adversaries (Guo Wengui) and collective threats (Hong Kong protestors), while also projecting national strength during global crisis (the COVID-19 pandemic). Psycholinguistic tools quantify variation in narrative maneuvers employing hateful and negative language against critics in contrast to communitarian and positive language to bolster national solidarity. Network analytics further distinguish how groups of accounts used network maneuvers to act as balanced operators, organized masqueraders, and egalitarian echo-chambers. Collectively, this work breaks methodological ground on the interdisciplinary application of unsupervised and multi-view methods for characterizing not just digital campaigns in particular, but also coordinated activity more generally. Moreover, our findings contribute substantive empirical insights around how state-sponsored information operations combine narrative and network maneuvers to achieve interlocking strategic objectives. This bears both theoretical and policy implications for platform regulation and understanding the evolving geopolitical significance of cyberspace.
2. Title: Cross-platform spread: vaccine-related content, sources, and conspiracy theories in YouTube videos shared in early Twitter COVID-19 conversations
Abstract: ABSTRACT High uptake of vaccinations is essential in fighting infectious diseases, including severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) that causes the ongoing coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic. Social media play a crucial role in propagating misinformation about vaccination, including through conspiracy theories and can negatively impact trust in vaccination. Users typically engage with multiple social media platforms; however, little is known about the role and content of cross-platform use in spreading vaccination-related information. This study examined the content and dynamics of YouTube videos shared in vaccine-related tweets posted to COVID-19 conversations before the COVID-19 vaccine rollout. We screened approximately 144 million tweets posted to COVID-19 conversations and identified 930,539 unique tweets in English that discussed vaccinations posted between 1 February and 23 June 2020. We then identified links to 2,097 unique YouTube videos that were tweeted. Analysis of the video transcripts using Latent Dirichlet Allocation topic modeling and independent coders indicate the dominance of conspiracy theories. Following the World Health Organization’s declaration of the COVID-19 outbreak as a public health emergency of international concern, anti-vaccination frames rapidly transitioned from claiming that vaccines cause autism to pandemic conspiracy theories, often featuring Bill Gates. Content analysis of the 20 most tweeted videos revealed that the majority (n = 15) opposed vaccination and included conspiracy theories. Their spread on Twitter was consistent with spamming and coordinated efforts. These findings show the role of cross-platform sharing of YouTube videos over Twitter as a strategy to propagate primarily anti-vaccination messages. Future policies and interventions should consider how to counteract misinformation spread via such cross-platform activities.
3. Title: Influencing the Influencers: Evaluating Person-to-Person Influence on Social Networks Using Granger Causality
Abstract: We introduce a novel method for analyzing person-to-person content influence on Twitter. Using an Ego-Alter framework and Granger Causality, we examine President Donald Trump (the Ego) and the people he retweets (Alters) as a case study. We find that each Alter has a different scope of influence across multiple topics, different magnitude of influence on a given topic, and the magnitude of a single Alter’s influence can vary across topics. This work is novel in its focus on person-toperson influence and content-based influence. Its impact is two-fold: (1) identifying “canaries in the coal mine” who could be observed by misinformation researchers or platforms to identify misinformation narratives before super-influencers spread them to large audiences, and (2) enabling digital marketing targeted toward upstream Alters of super-influencers.
4. Title: Coordinating Narratives and the Capitol Riots on Parler
Abstract: Coordinated disinformation campaigns are used to influence social media users, potentially leading to offline violence. In this study, we introduce a general methodology to uncover coordinated messaging through analysis of user parleys on Parler. The proposed method constructs a user-to-user coordination network graph induced by a user-totext graph and a text-to-text similarity graph. The text-to-text graph is constructed based on the textual similarity of Parler posts. We study three influential groups of users in the 6 January 2020 Capitol riots and detect networks of coordinated user clusters that are all posting similar textual content in support of different disinformation narratives related to the U.S. 2020 elections.
5. Title: Multi-modal Networks Reveal Patterns of Operational Similarity of Terrorist Organizations
Abstract: Capturing dynamics of operational similarity among terrorist groups is critical to provide actionable insights for counter-terrorism and intelligence monitoring. Yet, in spite of its theoretical and practical relevance, research addressing this problem is currently lacking. We tackle this problem proposing a novel computational framework for detecting clusters of terrorist groups sharing similar behaviors, focusing on groups’ yearly repertoire of deployed tactics, attacked targets, and utilized weapons. Specifically considering those organizations that have plotted at least 50 attacks from 1997 to 2018, accounting for a total of 105 groups responsible for more than 42,000 events worldwide, we offer three sets of results. First, we show that over the years global terrorism has been characterized by increasing operational cohesiveness. Second, we highlight that year-to-year stability in co-clustering among groups has been particularly high from 2009 to 2018, indicating temporal consistency of similarity patterns in the last decade. Third, we demonstrate that operational similarity between two organizations is driven by three factors: (a) their overall activity; (b) the difference in the diversity of their operational repertoires; (c) the difference in a combined measure of diversity and activity. Groups’ operational preferences, geographical homophily and ideological affinity have no consistent role in determining operational similarity.
6. Title: Content and Dynamics of Websites Shared Over Vaccine-Related Tweets in COVID-19 Conversations: Computational Analysis
Abstract: Background The onset of the COVID-19 pandemic and the consequent “infodemic” increased concerns about Twitter’s role in advancing antivaccination messages, even before a vaccine became available to the public. New computational methods allow for analysis of cross-platform use by tracking links to websites shared over Twitter, which, in turn, can uncover some of the content and dynamics of information sources and agenda-setting processes. Such understanding can advance theory and efforts to reduce misinformation. Objective Informed by agenda-setting theory, this study aimed to identify the content and temporal patterns of websites shared in vaccine-related tweets posted to COVID-19 conversations on Twitter between February and June 2020. Methods We used triangulation of data analysis methods. Data mining consisted of the screening of around 5 million tweets posted to COVID-19 conversations to identify tweets that related to vaccination and including links to websites shared within these tweets. We further analyzed the content the 20 most-shared external websites using a mixed methods approach. Results Of 841,896 vaccination-related tweets identified, 185,994 (22.1%) contained links to specific websites. A wide range of websites were shared, with the 20 most-tweeted websites constituting 14.5% (27,060/185,994) of the shared websites and typically being shared for only 2 to 3 days. Traditional media constituted the majority of these 20 websites, along with other social media and governmental sources. We identified markers of inauthentic propagation for some of these links. Conclusions The topic of vaccination was prevalent in tweets about COVID-19 early in the pandemic. Sharing websites was a common communication strategy, and its “bursty” pattern and inauthentic propagation strategies pose challenges for health promotion efforts. Future studies should consider cross-platform use in dissemination of health information and in counteracting misinformation.
7. Title: Analysis of External Content in the Vaccination Discussion on Twitter
Abstract: The spread of coronavirus and anti-vaccine conspiracies online hindered public health responses to the pandemic. We examined the content of external articles shared on Twitter from February to June 2020 to understand how conspiracy theories and fake news competed with legitimate sources of information. Examining external content--articles, rather than social media posts--is a novel methodology that allows for non-social media specific analysis of misinformation, tracking of changing narratives over time, and determining which types of resources (government, news, scientific, or dubious) dominate the pandemic vaccine conversation. We find that distinct narratives emerge, those narratives change over time, and lack of government and scientific messaging on coronavirus created an information vacuum filled by both traditional news and conspiracy theories.
8. Title: Characterizing communities of hashtag usage on twitter during the 2020 COVID-19 pandemic by multi-view clustering
Abstract: The COVID-19 pandemic has produced a flurry of online activity on social media sites. As such, analysis of social media data during the COVID-19 pandemic can produce unique insights into discussion topics and how those topics evolve over the course of the pandemic. In this study, we propose analyzing discussion topics on Twitter by clustering hashtags. In order to obtain high-quality clusters of the Twitter hashtags, we also propose a novel multi-view clustering technique that incorporates multiple different data types that can be used to describe how users interact with hashtags. The results of our multi-view clustering show that there are distinct temporal and topical trends present within COVID-19 twitter discussion. In particular, we find that some topical clusters of hashtags shift over the course of the pandemic, while others are persistent throughout, and that there are distinct temporal trends in hashtag usage. This study is the first to use multi-view clustering to analyze hashtags and the first analysis of the greater trends of discussion occurring online during the COVID-19 pandemic.
9. Title: Detecting malware communities using socio-cultural cognitive mapping
Abstract: We apply a variation of socio-cultural cognitive mapping (SCM) to computer malware features explored previously by Saxe and Berlin that characterized malware binaries as benign or malicious based on 1024 program features derived from a deep neural network-based detection system. In this work, we model the features as attributes within a latent spatial domain using a weighted consensus graph representation to visualize and analyze the malware binary communities. The data used in our analysis is extracted from a Remote Access Trojan family named Sakula that first appeared in 2012, and has been used to enable an adversary to run interactive commands and execute remote program functions. Our results show that by SCM we were able to identify distinct malware communities within the malware family, which revealed insights into the overall structure of the various binaries as well as possible temporal relationships between the binaries.
10. Title: Analysis of Malware Communities Using Multi-Modal Features
Abstract: Identifying possible threat actors from samples of malware remains an active area of research with important ramifications for cybersecruity practitioners. The unsupervised identification and characterization of malware samples has been primarily treated as an early integration, multi-modal clustering problem where all possible features derived from the samples are concatenated into one feature vector, which can then be fed into a standard unsupervised learning algorithm. In this work, we focus on characterizing malware samples into possible threat actors from both late integration and intermediate integration multi-modal data perspectives. In doing so, we propose a new algorithm, Cross-Modal Influence Clustering, for characterizing malware samples into threat actor groups. We test our proposed method along with several other multi-modal clustering techniques on heterogeneous malware samples from three different threat actors. Our results indicate that our proposed method is the best method for clustering malware samples into threat actors in an unsupervised setting and that we observe consistently better results in characterizing malware samples by threat actors from intermediate or late integration multi-modal paradigms rather than an early integration one.
11. Title: Clustering Analysis of Website Usage on Twitter During the COVID-19 Pandemic
Abstract: In this study we analyzed patterns of external website usage on Twitter during the COVID-19 pandemic. We used a multi-view clustering technique, which is able to incorporate multiple views of the data, to cluster the websites’ URLs based on their usage patterns and tweet text that occurs with the URLs. The results of the multi-view clustering of URLs used during the COVID-19 pandemic, from 29 January to 22 June 2020, revealed three, main clusters of URL usage. These three clusters differed significantly in terms of using information from different politically-biased, fake news, and conspiracy theory websites. Our results suggest that there are political biases in how information, to include misinformation, about the COVID-19 pandemic is used on Twitter. © 2021, Springer Nature Switzerland AG.
12. Title: A complex networks approach to find latent clusters of terrorist groups
Abstract: Given the extreme heterogeneity of actors and groups participating in terrorist actions, investigating and assessing their characteristics can be important to extract relevant information and enhance the knowledge on their behaviors. The present work will seek to achieve this goal via a complex networks approach. This approach will allow to find latent clusters of similar terror groups using information on their operational characteristics. Specifically, using open access data of terrorist attacks occurred worldwide from 1997 to 2016, we build a multi-partite network that includes terrorist groups and related information on tactics, weapons, targets, active regions. We propose a novel algorithm for cluster formation that expands our earlier work that solely used Gower’s coefficient of similarity via the application of Von Neumann entropy for mode-weighting. This novel approach is compared with our previous Gower-based method and a heuristic clustering technique that only focuses on groups’ ideologies. The comparative analysis demonstrates that the entropy-based approach tends to reliably reflect the structure of the data that naturally emerges from the baseline Gower-based method. Additionally, it provides interesting results in terms of behavioral and ideological characteristics of terrorist groups. We furthermore show that the ideology-based procedure tend to distort or hide existing patterns. Among the main statistical results, our work reveals that groups belonging to opposite ideologies can share very common behaviors and that Islamist/jihadist groups hold peculiar behavioral characteristics with respect to the others. Limitations and potential work directions are also discussed, introducing the idea of a dynamic entropy-based framework.
13. Title: Socio-Cultural Cognitive Mapping to Identify Communities and Latent Networks
Abstract: Deriving networks and communities from individual and group attributes is an important task in understanding social groups and relations. In this work we propose a novel methodology to derive networks and communities from socio-cultural data. Our methodology is based on socio-cultural cognitive mapping (SCM) and k-NN network modularity maximization (SCM + k-NN) that produces both a latent network and community assignments of entities based upon their socio-cultural and behavioral attributes. We apply this methodology to two real-world data sets and compare the community assignments by our methodology to those communities found by k-Means, Gaussian Mixture Models, and Affinity Propagation. We then analyze the latent networks that are created by SCM + k-NN to derive novel insight into the nature of the communities. The community assignments found by SCM + k-NN are comparable to those produced by current unsupervised machine learning techniques. Additionally, in contrast to current unsupervised machine learning techniques SCM + k-NN also produces a latent network that gives additional insight into community relationships.
14. Title: Complex Networks for Terrorist Target Prediction
Abstract: Developments in statistics and computer science have influenced research on many social problems. This process also applies to the study of terrorism. In this context, network analysis is one of the most popular mathematical methods for analyzing terrorist organizations and dynamics. Nonetheless, few studies have applied network science to the analysis of terrorist events. Therefore, in this work we first introduce a novel method to analyze the heterogeneous dynamics of terrorist attacks through the creation of a dynamic meta-network of terror for the period 1997–2016. Second, we use our terrorist meta-network to test the power of Network-based Inference algorithm in predicting terrorist targets. Results are promising and show how this algorithm reaches high levels of precision, accuracy, and recall and indicate that network outcomes can be used in broader machine learning models.
15. Title: Detecting Latent Terrorist Communities Testing a Gower's Similarity-Based Clustering Algorithm for Multi-partite Networks
Abstract: Finding hidden patterns represents a key task in terrorism research. In light of this, the present work seeks to test an innovative clustering algorithm designed for multi-partite networks to find communities of terrorist groups active worldwide from 1997 to 2016. This algorithm uses Gower’s coefficient of similarity as the similarity measure to cluster perpetrators. Data include information on weapons, tactics, targets, and active regions. We show how different dimensional weighting schemes lead to different types of grouping, and we therefore concentrate on the outcomes of the unweighted algorithm to highlight interesting patterns naturally emerging from the data. We highlight that groups belonging to different ideologies actually share very common behaviors. Finally, future work directions are discussed.
16. Title: Lesson and Impressions of the Ghanaian Capital Markets
Abstract: Abstract : This project aims to discover underlying metrics that describe Frontier Capital Markets through a network-basedanalysis of Capital Market development and stability. This will be done modeling how Frontier markets succeedand fail through large-scale quasi-experiments. In undeveloped Capital Markets, achievement of the FrontierCapital Market designation is an initial step for access to Foreign Direct Investment. Global investment encouragedby the presence of a well-established and liquid Capital Market can promote stability, and consequentially, reducethe probability of international military intervention or shorten the requirement for military involvement. TheInternational Monetary broadly defines Financial stability as the financials systems ability to facilitate anefficient allocations of economic resources, to promote the effectiveness of other economic processes (such aswealth accumulation, economic growth, and ultimately social prosperity),
